Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/neck-and-back-problems-and-conditions/scoliosis/about-scoliosis/

---

About scoliosis
Scoliosis is the abnormal twisting and curvature of the spine. Scoliosis can develop at any age, but is most common in children aged 10 to 15.
Symptoms of scoliosis
Scoliosis is usually first noticed by a change in the appearance of the back.
Typical signs include:
a visibly curved spine
one shoulder being higher than the other
one shoulder or hip being more prominent than the other
clothes not hanging properly
a prominent ribcage
a difference in leg lengths
People with scoliosis may also have back pain. This is more common in adults.
When to get professional help
If you or your child have signs of scoliosis, contact a healthcare professional. They can examine your back and decide the best next steps with you.
Once you or your child has been diagnosed with scoliosis, you should see a specialist to talk about treatment options.
Cauda equina syndrome
Rarely scoliosis can cause a condition called cauda equina syndrome to develop. Cauda equina syndrome is serious back condition. It can lead to permanent damage or disability. If you develop this condition you’ll need to be seen by an emergency specialist spinal team.
Phone 111 if:
there has been a new, significant injury within the last 7 days, for example a fall from height or direct blow to the back
Or you have experienced a new onset of the following symptoms:
loss of feeling or pins and needles between your inner thighs or genitals
numbness in or around your back passage or buttocks
altered feeling when using toilet paper to wipe yourself
increasing difficulty when you try to pee
increasing difficulty when you try to stop or control your flow of pee
loss of sensation when you pee
leaking pee or a recent need to use pads
not knowing when your bladder is either full or empty
inability to stop a bowel motion or leaking
loss of sensation when you poo
change in ability to achieve an erection or ejaculate
loss of sensation in genitals during sexual intercourse
Causes of scoliosis
In most cases, the cause of scoliosis is unknown and it cannot usually be prevented. This is called idiopathic scoliosis. About 80% of cases of scoliosis are idiopathic.
It’s not thought to be linked with things like bad posture, exercise or diet.
There is a family history of the condition in some idiopathic cases. This suggests a possible genetic link.
Known causes of scoliosis
Some cases of scoliosis are caused by conditions that affect the nerves and muscles, like:
cerebral palsy
– a condition that affects the brain and nerves and happens during or shortly after birth
muscular dystrophy
– a genetic condition that causes muscle weakness
neurofibromatosis – a genetic condition that causes benign tumours to grow along your nerves
Congenital scoliosis
In rare cases, babies can be born with scoliosis. This is known as congenital scoliosis. It’s caused by the bones in the spine not developing properly in the womb.
Degenerative scoliosis
In adults, scoliosis can sometimes be caused by age related changes to parts of the spine. This is known as degenerative scoliosis.
Read more information on types of scoliosis from Scoliosis Support and Research
Diagnosing scoliosis
Scoliosis is first assessed by a healthcare professional with a physical examination of the spine, ribs, hips and shoulders.
You may be asked to bend forward to see if any areas are particularly prominent. For example, one of your shoulders may be higher than the other or there may be a bulge in your back or ribs.
After your assessment you may be referred to an spinal specialist. They will discuss further tests and treatments with you.
Scans
The specialist will usually take an
X-ray
to confirm the diagnosis of scoliosis.
This will help determine the size and shape of the curve.
In some cases, scans like a
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
or a
computerised tomography (CT) scan
can be recommended.
Treatment of scoliosis
Read about scoliosis treatment for children and young people
Read about scoliosis treatment for adults
Complications of scoliosis
Scoliosis can sometimes lead to further emotional and physical problems.
Having a visibly curved spine or wearing a back brace can cause problems related to body image, self-esteem and overall quality of life. This is particularly the case for children and teenagers with scoliosis.
If this is a problem for you or your child, you may find it useful to contact a scoliosis support group, like the
Scoliosis Association U
K
. These groups are a good source of information and support for people with scoliosis.
Lung and heart problems
In young children with severe scoliosis, the rib cage can be pushed against the heart and lungs. This can cause breathing problems and make it difficult for the heart to pump blood around the body.
This can also increase the chances of developing lung infections, like
pneumonia
, and can lead to problems like
heart failure
.
Nerve compression
In some cases of scoliosis, particularly those affecting adults, the bones in the spine compress nearby nerves. In severe cases, this can cause problems like:
back and leg pain
numbness or weakness in the legs
Source:
MSK Expert Panel