Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/leg-and-foot-problems-and-conditions/achilles-tendinopathy/

---

Achilles tendinopathy
This information is useful for those who have been diagnosed with an Achilles tendinopathy. People who are experiencing new or ongoing symptoms should contact a healthcare professional for assessment and diagnosis.
Read more about self-managing ankle problems
What is Achilles tendinopathy?
Achilles tendinopathy, sometimes known as tendinitis, is a condition that can cause pain, stiffness and swelling of the Achilles tendon. This is a tendon connecting your calf muscle to your heel.
What are the symptoms of Achilles tendinopathy?
Symptoms may vary from person to person. They can appear gradually or suddenly.
People may experience:
swelling
pain that’s worse during or after moving or exercising
stiffness that’s worse in the morning or after a period of rest
tenderness to touch the affected area
mild heat
loss of movement and strength around the ankle and foot
People can have one or multiple symptoms.
What are the causes of Achilles tendinopathy?
Achilles tendinopathy can occur in both active and inactive people.
The causes can be varied but there are some common factors that are important.
These can include:
a sudden or gradual change in load, for example changes in the level of exercise or taking up a new sport, beyond your normal levels of strength or endurance
spending a long time standing still
wearing unsuitable or poorly fitting footwear for the activities you’re doing
sedentary behaviour
that can weaken your muscles and tendons over time
smoking
other health conditions such as
being overweight
,
diabetes
and inflammatory
arthritis
How to manage Achilles tendinopathy
Managing Achilles tendinopathy can take time, in most cases several months or more.
Learn about exercises for foot conditions
To help manage the pain you can take painkillers.
Read more about taking painkillers
Achilles tendinopathy does not improve with rest, so, to help your recovery it’s important to keep up as much of your normal daily activity as you can. You may have to modify what you do, by taking breaks, doing less or changing activity.
When you see a Healthcare Professional they will give guidance on what exercise levels you should be aiming for.
If you’re waiting to see a Healthcare Professional you should be trying to do some exercise, this may cause some discomfort and short term pain that returns back to your normal level within a few hours.
Help and support
Following this advice, you should see gradual improvements over time.
If your symptoms haven’t improved within 12 weeks, or it’s got worse, after following this advice, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Find out how to
access MSK services in your area
.
When dealing with any health condition it’s important to also look after
your mental wellbeing
as this can impact your recovery.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group