Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/acne/

---

Acne
Acne is a common skin condition that often develops on the face, back or chest. It causes spots, oily skin, deeper cysts and sometimes skin that’s hot or painful to touch.
Symptoms of acne
Acne can cause different kinds of spots.
Blackheads
Blackheads are small black or yellowish bumps on the skin.
Whiteheads
Whiteheads are similar to blackheads but may be firmer.
Papules
Papules are small red bumps that may feel tender or sore.
Pustules
Pustules are similar to papules, but have a white tip in the centre. This is caused by a build-up of pus.
Nodules
Nodules are large hard lumps that build up beneath the surface of the skin and can be painful.
Cysts
Severe acne can cause nodules and cysts. These are large pus-filled lumps that can lead to scarring.
Diagnosing acne
Speak to your pharmacist if you have symptoms of acne. They’ll be able to diagnose acne by looking at your skin.
A pharmacist will look at how many spots you have and how inflamed and painful they are. This helps to work out how severe your acne is which can help to plan your treatment.
Your pharmacist will tell you if you need to see your GP for further treatment.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Treatment for acne
Treatment for acne depends on how severe it is.
Treatments may include creams that you put on your skin or oral medications.
A pharmacist can treat acne. If this treatment doesn’t work, or your acne is severe, they may advise you to speak to your GP.
It can take several months of treatment before symptoms improve. It’s important to be patient and continue your treatment, even if it doesn’t improve your symptoms immediately.
Treating acne in women
Hormonal therapies can often benefit women with acne. This is especially helpful if acne:
flares up around your period, or
is associated with hormonal conditions like
polycystic ovary syndrome
If you don’t already use it, your GP may recommend the
combined oral contraceptive pill
, even if you’re not sexually active. The combined pill can often help to improve acne in women, but it may take up to a year before the full benefits are seen.
Treating severe acne
If you have severe acne, your GP may refer you to an expert in treating skin conditions (a dermatologist). For example, if you have:
a large number of papules and pustules on your face, chest and/or back
painful nodules
A combination of antibiotic tablets and topical treatments that you apply directly to your skin may be used to treat severe acne. If this doesn’t work, a medication called
isotretinoin (Roaccutane)
may be prescribed. Your healthcare team will discuss if this treatment is suitable for you.
What causes acne?
Sebaceous glands are tiny glands found near the surface of the skin. They produce an oily substance called sebum to stop the hair and skin from drying out.
In acne, the sebaceous glands produce too much sebum. This mixes with dead skin cells and blocks hair follicles. Hair follicles are small holes that an individual hair grows out of. This blockage can cause symptoms of acne like whiteheads or blackheads.
The blocked hair follicles can also become infected by bacteria on the skin that would usually be harmless. This causes papules, pustules, nodules or cysts.
Common causes of acne in women
Acne is common in women. It can be a sign of a hormonal imbalance which may be caused by:
periods
pregnancy
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Other causes of acne
There are other causes of acne, including:
testosterone – teenage acne can be caused by an increase in the hormone testosterone during puberty
family history – you’re more likely to develop acne if your parents have had it
some cosmetic products
certain medications
wearing items that place pressure on an affected area of skin, like a headband or backpack
smoking
There’s no evidence that poor hygiene or sexual activity play a role in acne.
Who’s most at risk of acne?
Acne is very common in teenagers and younger adults.
Most people have acne on and off for several years before their symptoms start to improve as they get older. In some cases, acne can continue into adult life.
Complications of acne
Acne scarring can sometimes develop. Any type of acne spot can lead to scarring, but it’s more common when nodules and cysts burst and damage nearby skin.
Scarring can also occur if you pick or squeeze your spots, so it’s important not to do this.
Living with acne
If you have acne, there are some things that may help your symptoms.
Do
wash the affected area with a mild soap or cleanser and lukewarm water – very hot or cold water can make acne worse
use fragrance-free, water-based products on your skin
avoid wearing lots of make-up
remove make-up completely before going to bed
Don’t
do not wash the affected skin more than twice a day – washing often can irritate the skin and make symptoms worse
do not try to ‘clean out’ blackheads or squeeze spots – it can make them worse and cause permanent scarring
Mental health and wellbeing
Acne can sometimes affect your
mental health
and
wellbeing
. It may make you feel:
anxious
stressed
low
depressed
Speak to your GP practice for further advice on managing your mental health and wellbeing.
The images on this page were sourced from
dermnetnz.org
.
Source:
Centre for Sustainable Delivery