Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/allergic-rhinitis/

---

Allergic rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis is inflammation (redness and swelling) of the inside of the nose. It’s caused by an allergen, such as pollen, dust, mould, or flakes of skin from certain animals.
It’s a very common condition. For most people it’s easy to treat with medicines from a pharmacist.
Symptoms of allergic rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis usually causes
cold-like symptoms
, such as:
sneezing
itchiness
a blocked or runny nose
These symptoms usually start soon after coming into contact with something you’re allergic to.
Some people only get allergic rhinitis seasonally because they’re allergic to things like tree or grass pollen. Other people get allergic rhinitis all year round.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
you have allergic rhinitis and your symptoms get worse
you also have asthma and it’s getting worse
your symptoms are affecting your sleep and everyday life
you’re not sure what’s causing your symptoms
treatments from a pharmacist are not working
Diagnosing allergic rhinitis
Your GP will usually be able to diagnose allergic rhinitis from your symptoms and any triggers you may have noticed. If the cause of your condition is uncertain, you may be referred for allergy testing.
Treatment for allergic rhinitis
Treatment for allergic rhinitis depends on how severe your symptoms are.
Things you can do to help your symptoms
If you have mild allergic rhinitis, you can often treat the symptoms yourself.
Do
take over-the-counter medications, such as antihistamines
clean your nasal passages with a salt water solution
avoid triggers if you can
Always read the leaflet that comes with your medicine before taking it. Follow the recommended dosage instructions. If you’re not sure which treatments are suitable for you or your child,
speak to a pharmacist
for advice.
How to clean your nose with a homemade salt water solution
Boil a pint of water, then leave it to cool.
Mix 1 teaspoon of salt and 1 teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda into the water.
Wash your hands.
Stand over a sink, cup the palm of 1 hand and pour a small amount of the solution into it.
Sniff the water into 1 nostril at a time. Breathe through your mouth and allow the water to pour back into the sink. Try not to let the water go down the back of your throat.
Repeat the first 5 steps up to 3 times a day until your nose feels more comfortable.
You do not need to use all of the solution, but make a fresh solution each time you clean your nose.
Medication
Medication won’t cure your allergy, but it can be used to treat the symptoms.
Speak to your GP practice if your symptoms do not improve 2 weeks after starting medicine. They may prescribe a stronger medication such as a nasal spray containing
corticosteroids
.
What causes allergic rhinitis?
Allergic rhinitis is caused by breathing in tiny particles that you’re allergic to. The most common allergens in the air that cause rhinitis are:
house dust mites
pollen and spores
flakes of animal skin
wood dust
flour dust
latex
You’re more likely to develop an allergy if there’s a history of allergies in your family.
Complications of allergic rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis can lead to complications in some cases. These include:
nasal polyps – abnormal but non-cancerous (benign) growths inside the nose and sinuses
sinusitis
– inflammation that blocks the sinuses so mucus cannot drain into your nose as usual
blockage of the middle ear – due to a build-up of fluid behind the eardrum
These problems can often be treated with medication. Surgery is sometimes needed in severe or long-term cases.
Source:
ENT Scotland