Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/leg-and-foot-problems-and-conditions/ankle-problems/

---

Ankle problems
This information may be useful for those who have a new ankle problem. People who have been diagnosed with an ankle condition or have had recent ankle surgery should follow the advice of their healthcare professional.
Ankle problems can cause a range of symptoms including:
pain
swelling
stiffness
In many cases, new pain or a flare-up of long-standing ankle problems should begin to settle within 6 weeks without the need to see a healthcare professional.
When to seek help
Phone 111 if:
there’s been new significant trauma within the last 7 days, for example a fall from height or direct blow to the ankle
your ankle is misshapen
you’ve difficulty putting weight on your leg
Contact your GP, or phone 111 if your GP practice is closed, if:
your calf is hot, swollen and tender
you have pain that’s worsening despite following self-care advice
What causes ankle problems?
Ankle problems are fairly common and can be caused by injuries like tripping or going over on your ankle. They can also be caused by a flare up of an existing problem or muscle weakness around the joint.
It’s common to have soft tissue injuries in the ankle. Soft tissues include ligaments, muscles and tendons.
Further information on soft tissue injury.
Can ankle pain cause problems anywhere else?
You may feel some pain in the muscles around your calf and foot. This should improve as your ankle problem gets better.
Ankle problems can also cause limping. If the limp is severe, using a walking stick on the opposite side to your ankle problem may help.
How to use a walking stick.
Self-help
There are a number of things you can do to help your ankle problem.
Keeping your ankle moving is an essential part of your treatment and recovery.
How to get moving
Within the first 24 to 48 hours of the onset of an ankle problem you should try to:
reduce your activities but move as much as your symptoms allow
put your ankle in an elevated position, when resting
move your ankle gently for 10 to 20 seconds every hour when you’re awake
avoid long periods on your feet
When using stairs it may help to:
lead with your good leg when going upstairs to reduce the strain on your ankle
lead with your problem leg when going downstairs to reduce the strain on your ankle
use a handrail (if available) when going up and downstairs
After 48 hours:
try to use your leg more – exercise really helps your ankle and can relieve pain
do whatever you normally would and stay at, or return to work – this is important and is the best way to get better
It’s beneficial to do specific exercises that can help in your recovery. They may be challenging at the beginning so just do what you can and try to build it up over time.
Exercises to help with ankle problems
Benefits of keeping active
Keeping active is an essential part of your treatment and recovery and is the single best thing you can do for your health.
Being physically active can:
maintain your current levels of fitness – even if you have to modify what you normally do, any activity is better than none
keep your other muscles and joints strong and flexible
prevent a recurrence of the problem
help you aim for a healthy body weight
Avoid sports or heavy lifting until you have less discomfort and good movement. Remember to warm up before sports.
Pain treatments
The following can help to reduce the pain:
pain medication – this can help you move more comfortably, which can help your recovery
heat or ice packs
More about taking painkillers.
Treating with ice or heat
Heat or ice can be beneficial in the management of musculoskeletal pain.
Ice is most beneficial if your ankle problem is related to an injury. You can try heat to help your pain levels if there’s no swelling and your symptoms are not related to a recent injury.
Never place ice or heat directly on your skin. Use a barrier, like a towel, to protect your skin from a burn.
How long you use ice as a treatment can vary. However, you should generally apply heat or ice for up to 15 minutes. You should also leave a few hours between treatments.
You should stop treating the area with ice or heat and seek advice from a medical professional if you notice an increase in redness, discolouration or blistering of the skin.
If you have any issues with circulation or sensation, you shouldn’t use ice or heat as a treatment for ankle pain.
Work
It’s recommended you stay at or return to work as quickly as possible during your recovery. You don’t need to be pain or symptom-free to return to work.
Help and support
Following this advice, you should see gradual improvements over time.
You should see the biggest change in your symptoms within the first couple of weeks. Most problems should have improved within 6 weeks.
If your ankle problem hasn’t improved within 6 weeks of following this advice, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Find out how to access MSK services in your area.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group