Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/leg-and-foot-problems-and-conditions/ankle-avulsion-fracture/

---

Ankle avulsion fracture
Your ankle avulsion fracture or 5th metatarsal fracture may be referred to as a fracture, break or crack. These terms all mean the same thing.
When you have a fracture, it’s not just the bone that’s affected. You’ll also have injured some of the soft tissues around it. Soft tissues include the:
muscles
ligaments
tendons
nerves
Recovery times
Most of the healing happens between 4 to 6 weeks after the fracture. It’s normal to have aches and discomfort beyond this. This often happens when you try activities you haven’t done for a while.
It’s also normal for the area to be more sensitive for several months after the injury.
What can affect your recovery?
There are some things that may affect your recovery.
Smoking
Smoking affects all of your tissues and slows facture healing times. In some people, it can stop healing altogether.
Stopping smoking as your fracture heals will help to ensure the best recovery.
Get help to stop smoking.
General Health
Some medical conditions, like diabetes, may slow down the healing process.
Eating a healthy diet and keeping yourself active will help your recovery.
Medication
Some medications can slow down fracture healing. If you have concerns about your medication talk to a healthcare professional.
Anti-inflammatory medication, like Ibuprofen or Naproxen, has been shown to delay healing.
What to expect after an ankle avulsion or 5th Metatarsal Fracture
This type of fracture is a minor fracture. It’s often treated in the same way as a strain or sprain. Some people may be fitted with a boot or plaster. Some might be given crutches.
Walking on your foot can help your recovery but may be uncomfortable at first.
Help and instructions for using crutches.
Pain after a fracture
It’s normal to have some discomfort in the areas around your fracture, including:
other soft tissues
nearby joints
areas that have been immobilised
Pain can change from day to day and it doesn’t always depend on what you’re doing. It’s common to have pain at rest.
It’s normal to have some pain even when your fracture has healed. Some people also experience discomfort in the fracture site during colder weather.
Your local pharmacy can give you advice on managing pain after a fracture.
Find your local pharmacy
Use Scotland’s Service Directory to find your local pharmacy.
Pharmacies
Swelling
Swelling is the start of healing. It’s normal to have it near the fracture first. It often spreads down your leg.
The amount of swelling changes with:
your position
your activity
the time of day
Even when your fracture has healed, it’s normal to have some swelling. This can last for several months.
How can I help swelling?
Having a lot of swelling can become uncomfortable or limit your movement. However, there are some things you can do to help the swelling. You can:
raise your foot above your heart when you’re resting – you can do this by supporting it with pillows
keep the other joints in your leg moving normally
avoid too much rest and too much activity
massage the swelling from your foot towards your groin
Bruising
It’s normal to have bruising after a fracture.
Bruising can be widespread and may appear a long way from your fracture. It can be very purple to start with and may change colour as you recover.
Getting back to normal activities
In general, you should gradually pace yourself back to your activities as you feel able.
Driving
You should contact your insurance provider before driving as your injury may affect your insurance.
Once you’re out of your moonboot or cast the general advice is you must be able to safely perform an emergency stop or manoeuvre.
You should always be in full control of your vehicle.
Work
Your return to work will depend on the type of work you do and your employer. You might be able to discuss a phased return to work or changed duties.
You don’t need to see a healthcare professional to return to work.
Daily activities
Keep doing any activities you’re able to, as your pain allows. Over time, gradually increase what you do.
Reduced flexibility and strength might make things more difficult to start with. This will get better as you slowly build up to all your usual activities.
Mood
Frustration or
low mood
after an injury is normal. As you get back to normal life this should get better.
Falls
Loss of confidence is common after a fracture.
Advice about preventing falls.
Bone scanning
You may be sent a letter inviting you for a scan of your bone density after a fracture.
It’s routine to be assessed for any further risk of fracture, especially if you:
are over the age of 50
have increased risk factors for fracture
Rehabilitation plan
There are things you can do to help your recovery after an ankle fracture.
0 to 2 weeks after your injury
In the weeks just after your injury, you should:
weight bear as much as you’re able to
manage your pain and swelling
increase movement in your foot and ankle with gentle exercises
2 to 6 weeks after your injury
Between 2 to 6 weeks after your injury, you should:
bear weight fully through your leg
start balance exercises
6 to 12 weeks after your injury
Between 6 to 12 weeks, you can:
return to full function
resume normal day to day activity
return to higher impact activity
Help and support
If your ankle
function hasn’t improved within 6 weeks of following this advice, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Gentle exercises
Practise gentle foot and ankle exercises to build up strength and movement.
Find out about exercises for the ankle
Stop these exercises if they make your symptoms worse, or they cause new pain.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group