Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/eating-disorders/anorexia-nervosa/

---

Anorexia nervosa
Anorexia nervosa (BSL)
|
Anorexia nervosa (audio)
|
Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder. It’s a serious, potentially life-threatening, mental health condition.
It can affect people from all ethnicities and backgrounds. It can also occur at any age but most often starts in your teens and early adulthood.
Sometimes people with anorexia nervosa don’t realise how serious their condition is which may make it more difficult to seek help.
People who have anorexia nervosa are very concerned with their weight, body shape and the amount of calories they eat and drink. They may limit what they eat and drink and develop lots of rules around it. They may also exercise excessively.
They may also use other methods to try to control their weight, like using
laxatives
or making themselves sick after eating.
Symptoms of anorexia nervosa
Anorexia nervosa can have a range of symptoms. Most of the time people won’t have all of these.
Symptoms include:
if you’re under 18, your weight and height may be lower than the healthy range expected for your age
if you’re an adult, you may have an unusually low body mass index (BMI) or rapidly lose weight over a short time
severely restricting food, drink and calories so that your body doesn’t get the nutrition it needs
thinking about food a lot
being very careful about what you eat, such as avoiding eating any foods you see as fattening or unhealthy
making yourself sick after food or using drugs like laxatives or weight loss medication
believing you’re overweight when you’re a healthy weight or underweight
avoiding looking in mirrors or wearing baggy clothes
constantly checking your weight and comparing yourself to others
if you get periods and you have anorexia nervosa,
your periods may stop
doing an excessive amount of exercise
physical changes, like feeling lightheaded or dizzy, hair loss or dry skin
feeling tired and cold
changes to your bone density make them more fragile and more likely to break
difficulty concentrating, which affects your work or study
changes to the way you think which may include making very strict rules for yourself
compulsive checking of ingredient lists and nutrition labels
having rigid food rules and beliefs.
criticising others’ food choices.
fixation on eating foods that are considered healthy or clean
You can never tell how unwell a person is from just their weight or BMI.
In children with anorexia nervosa, puberty and the associated growth spurt may be delayed. They may gain less weight than expected for someone going through puberty.
Getting help for anorexia
Speak to your GP practice and ask for an urgent appointment if:
You think you have an eating disorder like anorexia nervosa or are experiencing symptoms like:
rapid weight loss
very low weight
collapsing or fainting
dizziness
tiredness or fatigue
weakness
dehydration
muscle spasms
pins and needles
irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
chest painshigh levels of distress like feeling really upset, agitated and uncomfortable
BEAT have more information on
planning an appointment, how to talk to your GP and what will happen at an appointment
.
If you feel like it would help you, you can take a friend or family member to your appointment.
It can be difficult to know what the right questions to ask at an appointment are,
it’s ok to ask
has some ideas that may be helpful.
Helping someone else with anorexia nervosa
If someone close to you is showing signs of anorexia nervosa, you can offer help and support.
You could try talking to them about how they feel, and encourage them to think about getting help. Try not to put pressure on them or be critical of them, as this could make things worse. You could also offer to help by going with the person to see their GP.
Anorexia nervosa can often make people think they are making positive changes or are not as ill as they are. They can be unable to recognise the harmful effects of anorexia nervosa. This can be a challenging conversation to have with your loved one.
If you’d like to get some advice on how to help, speak to a healthcare professional for information on:
how to help the person recognise that they have a problem
the treatments available
how you can support them during their treatment
Beat has more information about how to support someone with anorexia
SupportED have information on caring for someone with an eating disorder
Cared have information for families and carers of people with eating disorders
Feast have information for parents of those with an eating disorder
Diagnosing anorexia nervosa
When making a diagnosis, your GP will probably ask questions about your weight and eating habits.
For example, they might:
ask if you’ve lost a lot of weight recently or quite quickly
ask how you feel about your weight, and if you’re worried about it
ask if you make yourself sick regularly
check if you have periods, whether your periods have stopped and if so, for how long
check your weight – if this feels frightening, you can request that you are not told your weight
check your pulse and blood pressure
do a blood test
It’s important to answer these questions honestly. Your GP isn’t trying to judge you. They just need to accurately assess your symptoms.
BEAT have more information on
planning an appointment, how to talk to your GP and what will happen at an appointment
.
Referral to a specialist
If your GP thinks you may have anorexia nervosa, they’ll refer you to a specialist in eating disorders for a more detailed assessment.
If you’re not referred to a specialist service there is support available to you through services like:
BEAT
SupportED
Treatment for anorexia nervosa
You can recover from anorexia nervosa, but it may take time and recovery will be different for everyone.
There are effective treatments for anorexia nervosa. Recovery usually involves working with a mental health team and will include dietetic support and talking therapies. Some people may also need additional support around their physical health or other treatments.
It’s important to start treatment as early as possible to reduce the risk of serious complications.
Treatment for anorexia nervosa is slightly different for adults and those under 18 years old.
The psychological therapies matrix for Anorexia Nervosa
explains what therapies are most likely to help you based on your needs and the current evidence.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
You might be offered cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), either individually or as part of a group. CBT starts with the idea that thoughts, feelings, and behaviour are linked and affect one another.
Learn more about talking therapies
Family Based Treatment
Family Based Treatment (FBT) involves the whole family in solving their child or young person’s eating disorder. During FBT parents and carers are an essential part of the solution and members of the treatment team.
Interpersonal psychotherapy
Interpersonal psychotherapy explores the link between relationships, feelings and eating behaviours.
Psychological treatments for children and young people
Family Based Treatment (FBT) involves the whole family in solving their child or young person’s eating disorder. During FBT parents and carers are an essential part of the solution and members of the treatment team.
CBT may also be used.
Beat has more information about treatment for anorexia
SIGN guidelines for eating disorders
Complications of anorexia nervosa
Anorexia nervosa can cause other physical health complications.
Some people can be at higher risk of physical complications. This means they should be regularly monitored by a healthcare professional. This includes people who:
have a very low weight
lose weight quickly
are making themselves sick several times a day
are regularly using laxatives
People with anorexia nervosa have an increased risk of:
health problems caused by
malnutrition
an imbalance of vitamins and minerals
problems with the
heart and blood vessels
– including poor circulation, an irregular heartbeat,
low blood pressure
, heart valve disease,
heart failure
, and swollen ankles, feet and legs (oedema)
having a weakened immune system or anaemia
low blood sugar levels (
hypoglycaemia
)
kidney, liver or bowel problems
problems with muscles and bones – including feeling tired and weak, osteoporosis (fragile bones), and problems with physical development in children and young adults
problems with the brain and nerves – including difficulties with concentration and memory
loss of sex drive
(libido) and
impotency
in men
dental problems, like
tooth decay
caused by regular vomiting
If you feel unwell with any of these symptoms you should contact a healthcare professional.
Refeeding Syndrome
Refeeding Syndrome can happen when someone who is malnourished starts eating. If food is introduced too quickly it can cause serious complications due to an imbalance in vitamins and minerals.
It’s important to speak to a healthcare professional if you’re significantly malnourished and are starting to eat again. They will be able to help you safely introduce food.
Anorexia nervosa and pregnancy
Anorexia nervosa can lead to
irregular menstrual cycles (periods)
, or cause your periods to stop altogether. Your period should return during your recovery when you’re at a healthier weight.
You should continue to use birth control if you aren’t planning a pregnancy, even if your periods are irregular or have stopped.
If you have anorexia nervosa and are trying to become pregnant, you should discuss this with your GP and care team.
Anorexia nervosa during pregnancy can increase the risk of complications, like:
miscarriage
giving birth early (premature birth)
having a baby with a low birth weight
You’re also likely to need extra care and support during pregnancy if you have previously had anorexia nervosa and recovered from it. You should discuss this with your midwife.
Further support
Find information and services that can offer advice and support about eating disorders
Source:
Scottish Government