Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/anxiety-disorders-in-children-and-young-people/

---

Anxiety is a feeling of unease, like worry or fear. In children and young people, it’s an understandable reaction to change or a stressful event.
It’s normal for children to feel worried or anxious from time to time. They might feel anxious when they’re starting school or nursery, or moving to a new area.
For some children, anxiety regularly affects their behaviour and thoughts on a daily basis. This can interfere with their school, home and social life. This is when you may need to speak to a professional to help support your child.
Symptoms of anxiety in children and young people
Anxiety can make children feel scared, panicky, embarrassed or ashamed.
Signs of anxiety can include:
finding it hard to concentrate
not sleeping, or waking in the night
not eating properly
quickly getting more angry or irritable than they usually do
always worrying or having negative thoughts
feeling tense and fidgety, or using the toilet more often than usual
always crying
being clingy all the time
complaining of tummy aches and feeling unwell
being withdrawn and not wanting to do things they used to enjoy
Your child may not be old enough to recognise why they’re feeling this way.
Speak to your GP practice or a health professional in your child’s school if:
Your child has anxiety and:
you feel it’s not getting better or it’s getting worse
you’ve taken steps to support your child but these haven’t worked
you think it’s slowing down their development
you think it’s badly affecting their confidence
you think its affecting their schooling or relationships
it happens often or all the time
it often makes them feel unwell – like feeling sick or having constant headaches
they become very withdrawn
they’re anxious about doing things they used to enjoy
Types of anxiety in children and young people
Some common types of anxiety in children and young people are:
a fear or
phobia
about something specific
regularly feeling anxious for no obvious reason
separation anxiety – where a child worries about not being with their parent or caregiver
social anxiety – where a child might not want to go out in public, see friends or take part in activities
school-based anxiety – where a child might not want to go to school because of things like friendships, bullying or schoolwork
generalised anxiety – where a child may feel anxious about lots of situations rather than one specific thing
post-traumatic stress disorder
obsessive compulsive disorder
Where to get help for anxiety disorders in children and young people
Speak to your GP or other healthcare professionals in your child’s school about their anxiety. This could include the school nurse, doctor or educational psychologist.
You might want to do this on your own or with your child. Sometimes your child might be able to have an appointment without you.
The healthcare professional should listen to your concerns and offer some advice about what to do next.
Child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS)
Your child may be referred to the local child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS). CAMHS staff are trained to help young people with a wide range of problems. Alternatively, they might be referred to another service like their school counsellor.
Professionals who work in CAMHS services include:
psychologists
psychiatrists
nurses
occupational therapists
physiotherapists
and other specially trained professionals
They should offer help and support to parents and carers as well as the child.
Find out more about CAMHS
Counselling and community services
Your child may be able to get support from school counselling services or community-based mental health support.
School counselling services are set up for young people to talk about what’s worrying them, and get support and advice.
Find out more about the support available in your community
Telephone or online help
It can be helpful to use telephone helplines or online services to get advice about anxiety. It can sometimes be easier to talk to someone who doesn’t know you.
YoungScot
has information about support organisations.
YoungMinds
has information about where to get support.
Support for parents
If a child is experiencing anxiety, there’s plenty parents and carers can do to help. First, it’s important to listen to your child about their anxiety or worries.
YoungMinds
has advice and resources for parents.
YoungScot
has advice and support for young people.
Treatment for anxiety disorders in children and young people
The type of treatment offered will depend on what is causing your child’s anxiety.
It might be helpful for your child to talk to a healthcare professional. They’ll help by talking about how they can work through the situation.
Your child might see a clinical professional through CAMHS. If they’re at a youth counselling service, they might see a trained youth counsellor or psychotherapist.
Psychological therapies
Psychological therapies
can help with anxiety. These are evidence based talking treatments, like cognitive behavioural therapy.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) can help your child manage their problems by changing the way they think, feel and react.
Your child will work with the psychological professional to help understand what’s causing their anxiety and what might help. They’ll help your child to find strategies for coping in situations that make them anxious.
The
psychological therapies matrix
describes the most helpful talking therapies for anxiety.
Medication
If your child’s anxiety problem hasn’t got better with psychological treatments, your doctor may talk to you about trying medication. Medication is usually only prescribed by doctors who specialise in children and young people’s mental health.
Medication can be helpful for certain people but can take time to take effect.
What causes anxiety disorders in children and young people
Some children are more nervous and anxious and less able to cope with stress than others.
Having a close family member with anxiety might make your child more likely to have it too. Parents of anxious children may recognise the signs and remember feeling and behaving the same when they were younger.
Some children can also develop anxiety after a series of difficult life events. They may be able to cope with one of these events. Several difficult events together, or a traumatic single event, may be too much for them to cope with.
Some children might develop anxiety after stressful events like:
moving house and school often
parents who constantly fight or do not get on
the death of a close relative or friend
becoming ill or injured in an accident
a family member who is unwell or needs extra support
school-related issues like homework or exams, or bullying or friendship problems
becoming involved in crime
being abused or neglected
Older children and young people tend to worry more about:
school performance
relationships
health
the future
Complications of anxiety disorders in children and young people
Long-term anxiety can interfere with a child’s personal development, family life and schooling.
Anxiety disorders that start in childhood sometimes carry on into adulthood.
Young people with an anxiety disorder can also:
misuse drugs
experience
clinical depression
feel hopeless
Source:
NHS 24