Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/conditions-that-can-affect-multiple-parts-of-the-body/arthritis/

---

Arthritis
Arthritis is a common condition that causes pain and inflammation in a joint. It affects people of all ages, including children.
Types of arthritis
The 2 most common types of arthritis are:
osteoarthritis
rheumatoid arthritis
Other types of arthritis include:
ankylosing spondylitis
gout
psoriatic arthritis
enteropathic arthritis
reactive arthritis
secondary arthritis
Other conditions related to arthritis include:
cervical spondylosis
fibromyalgia
lupus
polymyalgia rheumatica
Arthritis in children
Arthritis is often associated with older people, but it can also affect children.
Most types of childhood arthritis are known as juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). JIA causes pain and inflammation in one or more joints for at least 6 weeks.
Although the exact cause of JIA is unknown, the symptoms often improve as a child gets older. This means they can lead a normal life.
Further information on arthritis in children from Arthritis UK
Symptoms of arthritis
Your symptoms will vary depending on the type of arthritis you have.
Speak to your GP practice if you have:
joint pain
tenderness in the joints
stiffness in the joints
inflammation in and around the joints
restricted movement in the joints
warm, red skin on your joints
weakness and muscle wasting
Treatment for arthritis
There’s no cure for arthritis, but there are many treatments that can help manage the condition.
The best treatment for you will depend on what type of arthritis you have. Often, you will need a combination of treatments to help manage arthritis.
Some common treatments for arthritis include:
painkillers
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
corticosteroids
disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
physiotherapy
regular exercise
In severe cases, surgery may be recommended. This includes:
joint replacement
joint fusion
osteotomy (where a bone is cut and re-aligned)
Further information on treatments for arthritis from Arthritis UK
Occupational therapy
An Occupational Therapist can help if you have severe arthritis that affects your:
ability to move around your home
carry out everyday tasks, like cooking and cleaning
They can tell you about equipment you may need to help you live independently.
Depending on the type of arthritis, your GP may be able to refer you to an NHS Occupational Therapist.
Further information on Occupational Therapy
How to protect your joints
If you have arthritis, it’s important to look after your joints to prevent more damage.
Do
use larger, stronger joints as levers – for example, take the pressure of opening a heavy door on your shoulder rather than on your hand
use several joints to spread the weight of an object – for example, use both hands to carry your shopping
try to avoid gripping too tightly – grip as loosely as possible or use a padded handle to widen your grip
try to avoid sitting in the same position for long periods of time – take regular breaks so you can move around
How to do tasks at home
If you have arthritis, carrying out tasks around the home can be a challenge. But, making some practical changes to your home and changing the way you work should make things easier.
Do
keep things in easy reach
use a hand rail to help you get up and down the stairs
use long-handled tools to pick things up or to clean
fit levers to taps to make them easier to turn
use electric kitchen equipment, like tin openers, when preparing food
Living with arthritis
Living with arthritis isn’t easy. Carrying out simple, everyday tasks can often be painful and difficult. But, there are many things you can do to make sure you live a healthy lifestyle.
Work
Many people with arthritis want to continue to work for many reasons. For example, for better financial security and higher self-esteem.
You may find work challenging, but your employer should help you get the training and support you need. Speak to your line manager or HR department about your condition to get the right support.
Treatment can also help you return to work after being diagnosed with arthritis.
If your arthritis is so severe that you’re unable to work, help is available. For example, the
Personal Independence Payment
.
Further information on work and arthritis from Arthritis UK
Diet
It’s very important to eat a healthy, balanced diet if you have arthritis. Eating healthily will give you all the nutrients you need and help you maintain a healthy weight.
Your diet should include a variety of foods from all 5 food groups. These are:
fruit and vegetables
starchy foods
– like bread, rice, potatoes and pasta
meat, fish, eggs and beans
milk and dairy foods
foods containing
fat and sugar
Further information on a healthy, balanced diet
Managing your weight
If you’re overweight, losing weight can help you cope with arthritis.
Too much weight places excess pressure on the joints in your hips, knees, ankles and feet. This can lead to more pain and mobility problems.
Further information on managing your weight
Exercise
If your arthritis is painful, you may not feel like exercising. But, being active can help reduce and prevent pain.
Alongside a healthy diet, regular exercise can help you lose weight which will place less strain on your joints.
Regular exercise can also:
improve the range of movement in your joints
improve joint mobility
increase muscle strength
reduce stiffness
boost your energy
As long as you do the right type and level of exercise for your condition, your arthritis won’t get any worse. Speak to your GP for advice about the type and level of exercise that’s right for you.
Further information on exercising with arthritis from Arthritis UK
Telecare Self-Check online tool
The Telecare Self-Check online tool can help you find the right support for you in your area.
Source:
Scottish Society for Rheumatology