Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-adhd/

---

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a group of behavioural symptoms that include:
difficulty concentrating and paying attention
hyperactivity
impulsiveness
Symptoms of ADHD in children and teenagers
Symptoms of ADHD tend to be noticed at an early age. They may become more noticeable when a child’s circumstances change, like when they start school.
The main symptoms of ADHD in children and teenagers are:
Inattentiveness
The main signs of inattentiveness are:
having a short attention span
being easily distracted
making careless mistakes
appearing forgetful
losing things
being unable to stick at tedious or time-consuming tasks
appearing to be unable to listen to or carry out instructions
constantly changing activity or task
having difficulty organising tasks
Hyperactivity and impulsiveness
The main signs of hyperactivity and impulsiveness are:
being unable to sit still, especially in quiet surroundings
constantly fidgeting
being unable to concentrate on tasks
excessive physical movement
excessive talking
being unable to wait their turn
acting without thinking
interrupting conversations
little or no sense of danger
Symptoms of ADHD in adults
If you’re an adult with ADHD, you may find that:
you get easily distracted and find it hard to notice details, particularly with things you find boring
it’s hard to listen to other people – you may find yourself finishing their sentences for them or interrupting them
it’s hard to follow instructions
you find it hard to organise yourself – you start a lot of things without ever finishing them
you find it hard to wait
you fidget and can’t sit still when there’s nothing much going on
you’re forgetful and tend to lose or misplace things
you easily get irritable, impatient or frustrated and lose your temper quickly
you feel restless or edgy, have difficulty turning your thoughts off
you find stress hard to handle
you tend to do things on the spur of the moment, without thinking, which gets you into trouble
Some people with ADHD have problems with inattentiveness, but not with hyperactivity or impulsiveness.
Related conditions
Some people might have other conditions alongside ADHD.
Related conditions in children and teenagers with ADHD
Some children may also have signs of other problems or conditions alongside ADHD, like:
anxiety disorder
oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) – this involves negative and disruptive behaviour, particularly towards figures of authority
conduct disorder – this often involves antisocial behaviour, like stealing and harming people or animals
depression
sleep problems
autistic spectrum disorder (ASD)
epilepsy
Tourette’s syndrome
learning difficulties, like dyslexia
The symptoms of ADHD can improve with age. Although many adults diagnosed with the condition at a young age continue to experience problems.
Related conditions in adults with ADHD
ADHD in adults can occur alongside several related problems or conditions.
One of the most common conditions is depression. Other conditions that adults may have alongside ADHD include:
personality disorders
bipolar disorder
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
ADHD can also cause problems like difficulties with relationships and social interaction.
Causes of ADHD
The exact cause of ADHD isn’t fully understood.
A combination of the following factors might be responsible:
Genetics
ADHD tends to run in families. The genes you you inherit from your parents are a factor in developing the condition. The way ADHD is inherited is complex and isn’t thought to be related to a single gene.
Brain function and structure
Research has identified some possible differences in the brains of people with ADHD.
Some studies involving brain scans have suggested that certain areas of the brain may be a different size in people with ADHD.
Other studies have suggested that people with ADHD may have a chemical imbalance in the brain. Or that some chemicals may not work properly.
Groups at risk
Certain people are also believed to be more at risk of ADHD, including people:
who were born prematurely (before the 37th week of pregnancy) or with a low birthweight
with epilepsy
with brain damage – which happened either in the womb or after a severe head injury later in life
Diagnosing ADHD
Speak to your GP if you think that you or your child may have ADHD.
If you’re worried about your child, it may help to speak to their teachers before seeing your GP. This means you can find out if they have any concerns about your child’s behaviour.
Your GP can’t formally diagnose ADHD. They can discuss your concerns with you and refer you for a specialist assessment, if necessary.
Treating ADHD
Treatment for ADHD can help relieve the symptoms.
ADHD can be treated using medication or therapy. A combination of both is often best. Treatment is usually arranged by a specialist, like a paediatrician or psychiatrist.
Treatment of ADHD might include:
Medication
Medication might help you or your child concentrate better, be less impulsive and feel calmer.
Therapy
You might be offered therapy. This might be:
psychoeducation
behaviour therapy
parent training
education programmes
cognitive behavioural therapy
social skills training
Further support
The Scottish ADHD Coalition have information about
local support groups in Scotland
.
Procrastintion Station
are a Community Interest Company giving advice and support to adults with ADHD in Scotland.
Last updated:
06 September 2024
How can we improve this page?
Help us improve NHS inform
Thank You
Your feedback has been received
Don’t include personal information e.g. name, location or any personal health conditions.
Email Address
e.g. you@example.com
Message
Maximum of 500 characters
Send feedback
Add this page to
            Info For Me
Also on NHS inform
Anxiety
Depression
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
Epilepsy
Tourette's syndrome
Bipolar disorder
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
Other health sites
Mental Health Foundation: ADHD
ADHD UK
Scottish ADHD Coalition
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852