Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/eating-disorders/binge-eating-disorder-bed/

---

Binge eating disorder (BSL)
|
Binge eating disorder (audio)
|
Binge eating disorder (BED) is a serious eating disorder. Someone with BED will regularly eat very large quantities of food over a short period of time without feeling like they’re in control of what they’re eating. This eating behaviour causes feelings of distress and guilt and being overwhelmed.
If you’re binge eating and then making yourself sick on a regular basis, this is more likely to be
bulimia nervosa.
BED can affect anyone of any age, gender, ethnicity or age.
Binge eating disorder is more common than other eating disorders. In the UK around
1 in 25 people experience symptoms of binge eating disorder
.
There’s no one way for someone with binge eating disorder to look.
What is bingeing?
Signs that an episode of overeating is a binge, include:
eating much faster than normal
eating until you feel uncomfortably full
regularly eating a large amount of food when you’re not hungry
eating alone or secretly due to being embarrassed or ashamed about the amount of food you’re consuming
having feelings of guilt, shame or disgust during or after a binge
Symptoms of BED
The main signs of BED are regularly:
eating a large quantity of food over a short time (bingeing)
feeling out of control of your eating and feeling distressed
restricting your eating or putting strict rules around eating
fasting for long periods of time before or after a binge
hoarding food
feeling ashamed and hiding evidence of eating from others – close family and friends may be unaware of the distress and binges
planning the day around food by trying to restrict how much food you eat and then fasting which may lead to more binges
having low self-esteem and feeling shame
being preoccupied about weight and body shape
Speak to your GP practice if you’re experiencing these symptoms and think you might have BED.
If you feel like you have to purge what you’ve eaten after a binge to avoid gaining weight, you may have symptoms of
bulimia nervosa
.
If binges don’t happen regularly, and your weight is very low, you may have symptoms of
anorexia nervosa
.
Treatment for BED
There are treatments available for BED. Treatment does not directly focus on weight loss. It focuses on addressing things like relationships, feelings and thoughts that result in a person having a difficult relationship with food.
Guided self-help
Guided self-help is where you work through information and activities on your own. You’ll also have regular support sessions with a professional.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
Another treatment is cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), either individually or as part of a group. CBT starts with the idea that thoughts, feelings, and behaviour are linked and affect one another.
If problems in your life are causing you to binge eat, CBT helps you to reduce bingeing. It helps to identify the underlying issues so you’re less likely to binge in the future. It’ll focus on what’s keeping the eating disorder going rather than diet or weight loss.
Learn more about talking therapies
Interpersonal psychotherapy
Interpersonal psychotherapy explores the link between relationships, feelings and eating behaviours.
Family based treatment
Children and young people might be offered Family Based Treatment (FBT). This involves the whole family in solving their child or young person’s eating disorder. During FBT parents and carers are an essential part of the solution and members of the treatment team.
Medication
Medication is not recommended to treat BED but may be prescribed to treat other health conditions you might have alongside BED.
The
eating disorders SIGN guideline
has more information about treatment for eating disorders.
Long term physical effects of binge eating
Binge eating often leads to weight gain. Being overweight or obese can put you at risk of a number of physical health problems, some of which can be life threatening.
These include:
high cholesterol
high blood pressure
diabetes
osteoarthritis
some types of cancer
If you think you might have a binge eating problem, help is available. You can get support to tackle both the physical and mental effects of binge eating.
Getting help for binge eating disorder
If you have eating problems or think you may have an eating disorder, it’s important to seek help as soon as possible.
You could:
talk to someone you trust, like a friend or member of your family
see your GP – you may find it helpful to bring someone with you for support
contact an anonymous helpline like
Beat’s helpline
Helping someone else
If someone close to you is showing signs of an eating disorder, you can offer help and support.
You could try talking to them about how they feel and listening to what they say without judgement. You can encourage them to think about getting help. Try not to put pressure on them or be critical of them, as this could make things worse. You could also offer to help by going with the person to see their GP.
Your GP or a healthcare professional can give you advice on how to help someone. This includes giving you information on:
the treatments available
how you can support them during their treatment
helping you understand BED
Read more about how you can support someone with an eating disorder
Further support
Find information and services that can offer advice and support about eating disorders
Source:
Scottish Government