Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/bipolar-disorder/

---

Bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is a condition that affects your mood. You’re likely to have periods where your mood switches between:
mania – feeling very high and overactive (less severe mania is known as hypomania)
depression – feeling very low and lethargic
Symptoms of bipolar disorder
Symptoms of bipolar disorder depend on which mood you’re experiencing.
Depression
During a period of depression, you might feel:
down, upset or tearful
guilt and despair
agitated
tense
tired or sluggish
uninterested in everyday things
empty
suicidal
You may also feel like you:
can’t concentrate or remember things
can’t sleep, or wake up early
have no appetite
High mood (hypomania and mania)
High moods in bipolar disorder can be severe (called mania) or mild (called hypomania).
The manic period of bipolar disorder may make you feel:
very happy, elated or overjoyed
full of energy
self-important
full of great new ideas and important plans
easily irritated or agitated
alert
It may also make you:
have a high sex drive
talk very quickly
get distracted easily
not want to eat
do things with harmful consequences – like spending large sums of money, driving dangerously or getting drunk
say or do things that are out of character
Patterns of depression and mania
The pattern of mood swings in bipolar disorder varies widely between people. For example, some people have a few bipolar episodes in their lifetime and are stable in between. Others have many episodes.
You may have episodes of depression more often than episodes of mania, or the other way around.
Some people may also experience:
rapid cycling – repeated swings from a high to low without having a ‘normal’ period in between
mixed state – when you experience symptoms of depression and mania together
How to get urgent mental health support
Support is available if you or someone you know is having a mental health crisis or emergency, no matter what you’re going through.
Get urgent mental health support
Speak to your GP practice if you have:
extreme changes in your moods that last a long time or impact your everyday life
been diagnosed with bipolar disorder and treatments are not helping (or speak to your mental health specialist if you have one)
If you’re worried about someone else, encourage them to speak to their GP or phone 111 yourself for advice.
Diagnosing bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is common and anyone can develop it.
You should speak to your GP practice if you’re worried you could have symptoms of bipolar disorder. They may refer you to a psychiatrist (a qualified mental health specialist). If you have an appointment with a psychiatrist, you can take someone you trust with you.
The psychiatrist will ask about:
the type of symptoms you have
when you first experienced symptoms
how you’ve felt recently
your medical background
your family history
They’ll also ask if you’ve had thoughts about harming yourself.
This will help the psychiatrist decide what treatments are best for you.
Treatment for bipolar disorder
Most people have a combination of treatments to manage bipolar disorder. This can include:
medication
talking therapy
making lifestyle changes – like
exercising regularly
and
improving your diet
Treatment aims to reduce the severity and number of bipolar episodes you have.
What causes bipolar disorder?
It’s not known exactly what causes bipolar disorder. Many factors may work together to make you more vulnerable to it. This includes:
chemical imbalances in the brain
genetics – it can run in families
stressful life events – like the breakdown of a relationship, problems with money or physical illness
Pregnancy and bipolar disorder
Speak to your healthcare team if you have bipolar disorder and are trying to get pregnant. They’ll help you stay well before, during and after the pregnancy.
Tommy’s
have further information on bipolar disorder and:
planning a pregnancy
pregnancy
Support with bipolar disorder
Some people with bipolar disorder can talk to family and friends. Other people find it easier to turn to charities and support groups.
Many organisations have
support groups
. They can put you in touch with other people with the condition. This’ll help you share ideas and may let you see that you’re not alone.
Some organisations also provide online support in forums and blogs.
Looking after your health
Looking after your overall health can help you get more control over your recovery from bipolar disorder.
Do
try to have a regular routine
get plenty of sleep
eat a healthy diet
exercise regularly
Don’t
Don’t
do not take recreational drugs
do not smoke
do not drink too much alcohol
do not do shift work or work very long hours if you can avoid it
do not fly at night or across time zones if you can avoid it
do not drink lots of caffeinated drinks like coffee, tea or cola
Living with or caring for a friend or family member
Living with or caring for someone with bipolar disorder can be challenging. The person’s behaviour may change and relationships can feel the strain.
You may find it helpful to talk to a support group. You can also contact a counsellor for specialist support, if needed.
Get further information and support from:
Bipolar Scotland
Scottish Action for Mental Health (SAMH)
Source:
NHS 24