Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/injuries/skin-injuries/bites-and-stings/

---

Bites and stings
Bites and stings are common and usually only cause minor irritation.
Some stings can be painful and may trigger an allergic reaction.
Symptoms of bites and stings
The main symptoms of a bite or sting are:
pain where you were stung or bitten
a small, swollen lump on the skin
redness
itching
These symptoms will usually continue for a few days after the bite or sting.
Find out more about types of bites and stings
Treatment for bites and stings
Most bites and stings only cause a small reaction that can be treated at home.
Do
wash the area with soap and water
place a cloth soaked in cold water over the area
take a painkiller like paracetamol or ibuprofen if the area is painful or swollen
take an antihistamine to help reduce swelling
use a mild hydrocortisone cream on the affected area to prevent itching and swelling
Don’t
do not scratch the area as it could get infected
do not use home remedies to treat the bite or sting
Phone 999 if:
You or someone else has a bite or sting and:
your lips, mouth, throat or tongue suddenly become swollen
you’re breathing very fast or struggling to breathe (you may become very wheezy or feel like you’re choking or gasping for air)
your throat feels tight or you’re struggling to swallow
your skin, tongue or lips turn blue, grey or pale (if you have black or brown skin, this may be easier to see on the palms of your hands or soles of your feet)
you suddenly become very confused, drowsy or dizzy
someone faints and cannot be woken up
a child is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do (their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head or focus on your face)
You or the person who’s unwell may also have a rash that’s swollen, raised or itchy. These can be signs of a serious allergic reaction and may need immediate treatment in hospital.
Phone 111 or make an urgent appointment at your GP practice if:
You or someone else has an bite or sting and:
your symptoms are getting worse
you were stung in your mouth, throat or near your eyes
you have tummy pain and are being sick
you feel dizzy or lightheaded
you have a high temperature and swollen glands
you were stung more than once and feel unwell
you’ve had a serious allergic reaction to an insect bite or sting before
joint pain, swelling and a rash develop several hours after a sting
When to see a pharmacist
A pharmacist can advise you on medicines that can help ease the symptoms of a bite or sting. This includes:
antihistamines
steroid creams
painkillers
They can also provide other treatments if you need them, without you seeing a GP.
Find your nearest pharmacy
How to prevent bites and stings
There are things you can do to help prevent bites and stings.
If you’re outside:
cover your skin with long sleeved clothing and shoes
use insect repellent
keep food covered
avoid using strong perfumes that can attract insects
avoid camping near lochs or rivers
If you come across wasps, hornets or bees don’t panic or wave your arms around. You should move away slowly.
You can also keep your windows closed to stop insects getting indoors.
How to manage an insect infestation
If you have been bitten by fleas or mites, you may have an infestation in your home.
To manage an insect infestation, you could:
speak to a vet about treatments for your pet
treat bedding, carpets and soft furnishings with insecticide
vacuum carpets and soft furnishings
Bedbug infestations will need to be treated with insecticide. A pest control company will need to do this for you.
Further information on pest control services
Insect bites when travelling
In certain parts of the world, there’s a risk of catching diseases after an insect bite. This includes Africa, Asia and the Americas.
You may need to take antimalarial tablets to stop infection from diseases like
malaria
. You’ll also need to follow general steps to protect yourself. For example, you’ll need to use a mosquito net at night and wear insect repellent.
You’ll need to have a vaccination for other diseases like
yellow fever
.
There are no current medicines for other infections like Dengue. However, general protection measures will help reduce the risk. This includes wearing long-sleeved clothing and using insect repellent.
Further information on travel health and vaccinations
Source:
NHS 24