Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/children-and-young-peoples-muscle-bone-and-joints/bottom-shuffling-in-young-children/

---

Bottom shuffling in young children
Children sometimes sit on their bottoms and move themselves around using their legs instead of crawling. This is known as bottom shuffling.
They may use different ways to do this. Some:
lean to the side and use one arm and leg
use both legs together
bounce
Bottom-shuffling is often seen in children who have not spent time playing on their tummy.
Most children who bottom shuffle will start walking later (typically anything from 18 to 24 months). They will often lift their legs up when you attempt to support them in standing.
Is it normal for young children to bottom shuffle?
It’s normal for some children to bottom shuffle instead of crawl. All children develop differently. Most children will crawl.
The rate at which a child develops is affected by many factors including:
temperament
environment
family history
lack of movement opportunities (for example, if they have spent a long time in hospital)
Why do some young children bottom shuffle?
Children who bottom shuffle usually have not tolerated being placed on their tummy. As a result, they do not develop the strength in their arms, neck and back muscles. This means they struggle to push themselves up, move around on their tummy or crawl. They often prefer to lie on their back or to be supported in a sitting position.
Once children are able to sit independently, they are able to experience more of the world around them. Children who bottom shuffle can move very quickly and their hands are free to play with toys. This means they often have little motivation to pull up to stand on their feet or use their arms to crawl.
How can I help my child?
Encourage tummy time so they can learn how to take weight through their arms and shoulders. This will help develop strength and stability in their upper body.
If they do not tolerate lying flat on the floor, here are some activities you can try:
give them some support under their chest using a rolled up towel or lie them across your legs
sit on the sofa, lean back and lay your child on your chest (progress to lying on the floor with your child on your chest)
encourage your child to shuffle over obstacles on the floor, (such as over your legs or cushions) so that they have to bring their weight forward onto their arms
Once children are better with taking weight through their upper body, there are activities that will help them improve strength and stability in their hips and legs:
encourage your child to pull themselves up onto their knees, against you or a piece of furniture
encourage your child to pull themselves up to stand, against you or a piece of furniture
Baby walkers or baby bouncers do not help children to develop their ability to stand or walk and have been the cause of many serious accidents.
When should you speak to a healthcare professional?
Speak to a healthcare professional if:
your child has difficulty moving their arms or legs (e.g. if they appear to be weak, floppy or stiff)
your child appears to be using one side of their body more than the other
your child always falls to one side or backwards when they lose their balance
your child’s feet look very different from each other when standing
your child can’t put their feet flat on the ground when standing
your child shows significant delay in other areas of their development (e.g. play and language, fine motor skills)
Source:
NHS 24 CYP MSK Expert Panel