Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/children-and-young-peoples-muscle-bone-and-joints/bow-legs-and-knock-knees-in-children-and-young-people/

---

Bow legs and knock knees in children and young people
Bow legs mean that there is a gap between the knees when the ankles are pressed together.
Knock knees are present when there is a gap between the ankle bones when the knees are pressed together.
What are bow legs or knock knees?
In most children, its normal to have bow legs and knock-knees as they are growing.
All children are born with bow-legs and these are usually present until about the age of 2.
After this they become knock-kneed. The degree of knock-knee is most obvious between ages of 3 to 4.
The legs then gradually straighten reaching an adult shape by the age of 10 to 12.
What can affect how bow legs and knocked knees look?
Toddlers learning to walk often have their feet further apart for support. This can also make the legs appear more bowed.
If your child is above a healthy weight they are more likely to look knocked kneed. Making sure your child follows
the recommended activity guidelines
will help your child maintain a healthy weight.
Children with loose ligaments stretch their knee joints. This can often make their knee shape appear worse.
Treatment of bow leg or knock knees
The majority of children with bow legs or knock knees don’t need treatment. The shape of their legs will change as they grow and develop.
Your child doesn’t need special exercises or to have physiotherapy. They also don’t need leg braces.
Occasionally, where there is an underlying cause, this may need further assessment.
Speak to your healthcare professional if your child has:
asymmetry between two legs (legs look different from each other)
consistent pain in their legs limiting their activity
things haven’t improve over 12 months
bow legs beyond the age of 3, especially after 8
knock knees before the age of 2
knock knees after the age of 8
Source:
NHS 24 CYP MSK Expert Panel