Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/brain-stem-death/

---

Brain stem death
Brain stem death is when a person no longer has any brain stem function. When someone loses their brain stem function permanently, medical professionals will confirm they’re dead.
The brain stem
The brain stem is the lower part of the brain that’s connected to the spinal cord. It’s needed for the brain’s core functions, like consciousness, awareness, breathing and movement.
Once the brain stem has stopped functioning, there’s no way of reversing it. The person will not be able to regain consciousness or recover.
You might have heard the term ‘brain dead’. This refers to brain stem death.
Ventilators
In some circumstances, it’s possible to keep a person’s heart beating after brain stem death. This is done by keeping the patient on a machine called a ventilator, which breathes for them.
Even if someone is on a ventilator, there’s no way of reversing brain stem death. Their heart will eventually stop beating.
How brain stem death occurs
Brain death can occur when the blood and/or oxygen supply to the brain is stopped. This can be caused by:
cardiac arrest – when the heart stops beating and the brain is starved of oxygen
stroke
–when the blood supply to the brain is blocked or interrupted
a
severe head injury
a brain haemorrhage
infections, like encephalitis or
meningitis
Diagnosing brain stem death
There are a number of criteria for diagnosing brain stem death.
A patient:
must be unconscious and fail to respond to outside stimulation
must only be able to breathe by using a ventilator
must show no brain stem reflexes – these reflexes include coughing, gagging, and pupils responding to light
must show clear evidence that serious brain damage has occurred and can’t be reversed – this would usually be shown on a
CT scan
Ruling out other conditions
Before testing for brain stem death, two senior doctors must carry out a series of checks.
This process makes sure that the signs of brain stem death aren’t being caused by other factors, like:
an overdose of drugs, poisons or other chemical agents
an abnormally low body temperature (hypothermia)
low levels of sugar or salts in the patient’s blood
Once these factors have been ruled out, tests are carried out to confirm brain death. The diagnosis of brain death also has to be made by two senior doctors.
The doctors will explain the tests to you. You will be kept informed about your loved one’s condition at all times.
Testing for brain stem death
The two doctors will run a series of tests. They both have to agree on the results for a diagnosis of brain death to be confirmed. The tests are carried out twice to minimise any chance of error.
The tests used to determine whether brain stem death has occurred are:
shining a torch into both eyes to see if the patient reacts to the light
stroking the cornea (the transparent outer layer of the eye) with a tissue or piece of cotton wool to see if the eye reacts
applying pressure to the forehead to see if the patient moves in response
inserting ice-cold water into each ear, which would usually cause a person’s eyes to move
inserting a thin, plastic tube down the patient’s trachea (windpipe) to see if they gag or cough
disconnecting the person from the ventilator for a short period of time to see if they make any attempt to breathe on their own
Brain death will only be diagnosed if a person does not respond to all of these tests.
Occasionally, a person’s limbs or torso (the upper part of the body) may move after brain stem death has been diagnosed. These are spinal reflex movements generated by the spinal cord, and don’t involve the brain at all. They’ll not affect a diagnosis of brain stem death.
Once brain stem death is diagnosed, even though the patient’s heart is still beating, they are legally dead.
At this point the medical professionals will discuss next steps with a patient’s loved ones. This can include discussing potential organ donation, or other things that are important for end-of-life care for the patient.
Organ and tissue donation
After brain death has occurred, it may be possible for the person’s organs and tissue to be used for organ donation. This can often save or improve the lives of others.
Further information about organ and tissue donation
Source:
NHS 24