Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/breathing-problems-in-children/

---

Breathing problems in children
Breathing problems in children can happen for a number of reasons. Some causes are mild and will usually clear up by themselves. Others can be more serious and require treatment from a healthcare professional.
It can be extremely worrying if your child is wheezing or showing signs of difficulty breathing. It’s important to always use your instinct.
If your child appears well and their breathing problems improve after a short period of time, there is normally no need to worry.
Symptoms of breathing problems in children
Common symptoms of breathing problems in children include:
a runny or blocked nose – these are often caused by a
cold or flu
, but may also be caused by
allergies
a
cough
fast or irregular breathing
flaring nostrils
wheezing
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
Your child:
has lips or skin that are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of their hands
has severe difficulty breathing – they may make grunting noises or suck their stomach in under their ribcage
is breathing fast or stops or pauses
is pulling in at their throat area or their windpipe is more prominent
is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do – they may find it difficult to focus on you or are more difficult to wake up than usual
has a rash that does not fade when you press a glass against it (use the ‘
glass test
‘ from Meningitis Now)
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 38°C (101°F) or above and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 36°C (97°F) or less and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
Contact your GP practice urgently if:
Your child:
is more short of breath than usual
looks to be in pain when breathing in or coughing
appears to be confused, dizzy or lightheaded
feels sick or is being sick – for example, they can’t keep food or fluids down
is coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
has had a dry nappy for 12 hours or more, or is showing other signs of
dehydration
has a very high or low temperature – for example, they feel either hot or cold to touch or are shivering
has a distinctive barking cough
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
If you’re worried about your child
It can be distressing when you think your child is showing signs that they’re working harder to breathe. There are certain things to look out for, including if:
they’re sucking in their stomach in under their ribcage
it looks like they’re sucking in the middle of their neck above their collarbone – this is known as tracheal tug
they’re making unusual noises like a grunting sound
they’re showing signs of see saw breathing – this is when the chest sucks in when inhaling and expands when exhaling
Always trust your instincts and seek medical attention if your worried.
Rate of breathing in babies
Babies breathe at a faster rate than adults and older children. It’s normal for a newborn baby to take a slight pause when breathing for a few seconds. They may also breathe quicker for a short period. At 6 weeks old, they should have a more regular breathing pattern.
If your baby is unwell, their breathing rate may increase for a longer period of time. You may also notice they are working harder to breathe, for example, when they are feeding. You should seek medical attention from a healthcare professional if your baby is too breathless to feed.
Causes of breathing problems in children
Most breathing problems in children are caused by viral and bacterial infections. Although respiratory infections are very common, not all breathing problems in children are caused by infections.
Common causes of breathing problems in children include:
Viral infections – these infections cause most upper respiratory infections, including the
common cold
and
sore throat
. Other common viral infections can include bronchiolitis and
croup
.
Bacterial infections – including
pneumonia
and
sepsis
can cause breathing problems in children.
Asthma
– a long-term condition caused by inflammation of the airways in the lungs.
Allergies
– including
hay fever
are a common cause of breathing problems. These can cause a runny nose, sneezing and sore eyes. Allergies can trigger asthma symptoms.
Other causes of breathing problems in children can include:
a blockage of the airway, such as a small piece of food or a foreign object like a small toy
long-term health conditions that affect your breathing, such as
cystic fibrosis
breathing in cigarette smoke
Source:
Scottish Government