Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/bronchitis/

---

Bronchitis
Bronchitis is an infection of the main airways of the lungs (bronchi). It causes them to become irritated and inflamed.
Most cases of bronchitis can be treated at home.
Bronchitis can affect people of all ages. It’s most common in children under the age of 5. It’s more common in winter, and often develops after a
cold
, sore throat or
flu
.
Symptoms of bronchitis
The main symptom is a hacking
cough
, which may bring up yellow-green mucus (phlegm). Bronchitis may also cause:
sore throat
headache
runny or blocked nose
aches and pains
tiredness
shortness of breath
or wheezing
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
you have severe
chest pain
in the middle of your chest that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
your lips or skin are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
Contact your GP practice urgently if you:
are more short of breath than usual
have pain when breathing in or coughing
are feeling confused, dizzy, or lightheaded
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
are coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
have
heart palpitations
– this may feel like your heart is racing, going too slowly or skipping a beat or like a fluttering feeling in your chest
are peeing less than usual – this can be a sign of
dehydration
have a very high or low temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or you’re shivering
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Speak to your GP practice if:
you have breathlessness which is not improving
you have had a
cough
for more than 3 weeks
your symptoms are not improving or they are affecting your daily life
Treatment for bronchitis
In most cases, bronchitis will clear up by itself within a few weeks without needing treatment. This type of bronchitis is known as acute bronchitis.
Do
drink lots of fluid
get plenty of rest
stop smoking if you smoke
avoid smoky environments
take paracetamol to help headaches, fever and pain – always follow the manufacturer’s instructions
try making a honey and lemon drink to help soothe a
sore throat
and ease your cough
Your cough may last for several weeks after other symptoms have gone. You may also find that the continual coughing makes your chest and stomach muscles sore.
Complications of bronchitis
Pneumonia
is the most common complication of bronchitis. It happens when the infection spreads further into the lungs, causing air sacs inside the lungs to fill up with fluid.
People at an increased risk of developing pneumonia include:
elderly people
people who smoke
people with other health conditions, such as heart, liver or kidney disease
people with a weakened immune system
Mild pneumonia can usually be treated with
antibiotics
at home. More severe cases may need treatment in hospital.
Source:
Scottish Government