Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/bronchiectasis/

---

Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis is a long-term condition where the airways of the lungs become abnormally widened. It leads to a build-up of mucus (phlegm) that can increase risk of infection.
It can affect anyone at any age, but symptoms don’t usually develop until middle age.
Symptoms of bronchiectasis
The most common symptoms of bronchiectasis include:
a persistent
cough
that usually brings up mucus
recurrent
chest infections
fatigue
Symptoms can vary from person to person. They tend to get worse if you have an infection in your lungs.
When to get medical advice
Phone 111 if:
You have bronchiectasis and either:
a bluish tinge to the skin and lips
confusion
a high temperature of 38°C (100.4F) or above
rapid breathing (more than 25 breaths a minute)
severe chest pain that makes it too painful to cough and clear your lungs
Speak to your GP practice if:
you’ve had a
cough
for more than 3 weeks
Diagnosing bronchiectasis
Your GP may:
ask you about your symptoms
ask whether you smoke
listen to your lungs with a stethoscope (the lungs of people with bronchiectasis often make a distinctive crackling noise)
send you for an
X-ray
to rule out other conditions
If your GP thinks you may have a lung infection, they may take a sample of mucus so it can be checked for bacteria.
Referral to a specialist
If your GP thinks you may have bronchiectasis, they’ll refer you to a specialist in treating lung conditions for further tests such as:
a CT scan
– to see if your airways have widened or to see any signs of chronic infection
blood tests
– to check how well your immune system is working
mucus (sputum) test – to check for bacteria or fungi
throat swab – to look for viruses
genetic screening test – where a sample of blood or saliva is checked for the faulty gene that causes
cystic fibrosis
lung function test – to measure how hard and how quickly you can blow out air from your lungs to check how well they’re working
bronchoscopy – a flexible tube with a camera to look into your lungs to look for anything abnormal and to take samples from the airways if a chronic infection is suspected
Treatment for bronchiectasis
The damage caused to the lungs by bronchiectasis is permanent. But treatment can help your symptoms and stop the damage getting worse.
The main treatments include:
exercises and special devices to help you clear mucus out of your lungs
medication to help improve airflow within the lungs
antibiotics
to treat any lung infections
You should:
stop smoking
(if you smoke)
have the
flu vaccine
every year
make sure you have had the
pneumococcal vaccine
to protect against
pneumonia
make sure you have had the
coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccine
exercise
regularly
keep yourself well hydrated
aim for a
healthy weight
Surgery for bronchiectasis is only in rare cases. It’s only used if other treatments haven’t worked, the damage to the lung is localised to one lobe, and you’re otherwise healthy.
Exercises
There are a range of exercises which can help to remove mucus from your lungs. These are known as airway clearance techniques. They can often help coughing and breathlessness.
You can be referred to a physiotherapist who can teach you these techniques.
Active cycle of breathing techniques (ACBT)
Active cycle of breathing techniques (ACBT) involves you repeating a cycle made up of different steps. For example, a period of normal breathing, followed by deep breaths to loosen the mucus and force it up. Then you cough the mucus out. The cycle is then repeated for 20 to 30 minutes.
Do not attempt ACBT if you haven’t first been taught the steps by a physiotherapist. Doing it incorrectly could damage your lungs.
If you’re otherwise healthy, you’ll probably only need to do ACBT once or twice a day. If you develop a lung infection, you may need to do it more.
Postural drainage
Changing your position can also make it easier to remove mucus from your lungs. This is known as postural drainage. The steps are usually done with the help of a physiotherapist or carer.
Devices
There are also handheld devices that can help to remove mucus from your lungs. Generally, they use a combination of vibrations and air pressure to make it easier to cough out any mucus.
Examples of these devices include the Flutter, the RC cornet, the Acapella and the Aerobika.
These devices aren’t always available on the NHS. You may have to pay for one yourself.
Medication
In some cases, medications to make breathing or clearing your lungs easier may be prescribed.
Bronchodilators
If you have very severe symptoms, you may be prescribed
bronchodilator
medications.
Bronchodilators are medications you breathe in. They help make breathing easier by relaxing the muscles in the lungs. Examples of this type of medication include:
beta-2 agonist such as salbutamol, terbutaline, formoterol or salmeterol
antimuscarinics such as tiotropium, glycopyrronium or aclidinium
Antibiotics
If your symptoms are getting worse because of infection, you’ll need to be treated with
antibiotics
.
If you’re well enough to be treated at home, you’ll probably be prescribed 2 to 3 antibiotic tablets a day for 14 days. It’s important to finish the course even if you feel better.
Recovering fully from a bronchiectasis exacerbation can take months.
If your symptoms are more severe, you may need to go to hospital for antibiotic injections.
If you have 3 or more infections in a year, or your symptoms during infection are very severe, you may be given antibiotics on a long-term basis.
Nebulised medications
Occasionally, medication breathed in through a device called a nebuliser may be recommended. This makes it easier to clear your lungs.
Nebulisers have:
a face mask or mouthpiece
a chamber to change medication into a fine mist
a compressor to pump the medication into your lungs
Different medications can be given using a nebuliser. For example, salt water solutions, which should only be used if prescribed by your healthcare professional. These medications help to reduce the thickness of your mucus so it’s easier to cough out.
The medications used with a nebuliser can be provided on prescription. But the nebuliser device itself isn’t always available on the NHS. You may have to pay for a device, but only if it is advised for use by your healthcare professional.
What causes bronchiectasis?
The cause of bronchiectasis is not fully understood. Widened airways and increased risk of infection can be linked to:
previous infections, such as
pneumonia
or
whooping cough
problems with the immune system (the body’s defence against infection)
having long-term lung conditions (
COPD
)
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) – if you breathe in spores from a fungi that you’re allergic to
In most cases of bronchiectasis, no clear cause can be found. This is known as idiopathic bronchiectasis.
Source:
Scottish Government