Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/eating-disorders/bulimia-nervosa/

---

Bulimia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa (BSL)
|
Bulimia nervosa (audio)
|
Bulimia nervosa is a serious eating disorder and mental health condition. People with bulimia can find themselves trapped in a cycle of eating a large amount of food (also called bingeing). They then use methods like vomiting, over exercising or using laxatives to get rid of the food.
Symptoms of bulimia nervosa
There are some common symptoms of bulimia nervosa. You may experience some or all of these. This includes:
bingeing – eating an unusually large amount of food in a short time, this could be as much as or more than what a person might eat in a day
purging – trying to reduce the effect of bingeing by attempting to get food out of your body
fasting – trying to restrict food intake
focus on food – thinking about food all the time, being secretive about food intake or hoarding food
organising your life around a shopping, eating and purging cycle
having a fear of eating in front of others
focusing on your body shape and weight
focusing on exercising to burn calories beyond a healthy level
wearing baggy clothes to hide your body
withdrawing from friends and family
difficulty sleeping or sleeping more than usual
feeling irritable, low mood or anxiety
feeling guilt, shame or despair
always checking the ingredients or nutritional labels of food
difficulty concentrating
For some people bingeing and purging might be a way of trying to cope with overwhelming feelings.
Speak to your GP practice and ask for an urgent appointment if:
You think you have an eating disorder like bulimia nervosa or are experiencing symptoms like:
collapsing or fainting
dizziness
significant tiredness or fatigue
weakness
dehydration
muscle spasms
pins and needles
irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
chest pains high levels of distress like feeling really upset, agitated and uncomfortable
Diagnosing bulimia nervosa
When making a diagnosis, your GP will probably ask questions about your eating habits.
They could ask:
how you feel about your body shape or weight
if you make yourself sick after eating
if you use other methods of purging or use laxatives
if you binge-eat
It’s important to answer these questions honestly. Your GP isn’t trying to judge you or catch you out. They just need to accurately assess your symptoms.
Your GP may also check your weight and other physical measurements. If this feels frightening, you can request that you are not told your weight
BEAT have more information on
planning an appointment, how to talk to your GP and what will happen at an appointment
.
If you feel like it would help you, you can take a friend or family member to your appointment.
It can be difficult to know what the right questions to ask at an appointment are,
it’s ok to ask
has some ideas that may be helpful.
Blood tests and other tests
Your GP might check your pulse and blood pressure.
Sometimes an
electrocardiogram (ECG)
may be needed to check how well your heart is working.
Your GP may do
blood tests
to check the level of:
fluids in your body
chemicals or minerals, like potassium, in your blood
Blood tests look for the complications of bulimia nervosa. Even if they come back as ‘normal’, your GP may still refer you to an eating disorder specialist if you’re experiencing bulimia nervosa symptoms.
They may also suggest you make a dental appointment as frequent vomiting can harm your dental health.
Treatment for bulimia nervosa
Before your treatment begins, it’s likely you’ll have an overall assessment of your health. Your GP or another healthcare professional will do this.
The assessment will help your healthcare professional plan for your treatment and care.
They may assess:
your overall health and any medical needs
your social situation, like how much support you have from family and friends
your mental wellbeing or other mental health concerns
any other risks that might affect you
whether there are any physical health risks that need urgent treatment
Guided self-help
For many people, guided self-help, based on a cognitive behavioural approach, can be an effective treatment for bulimia nervosa.
Guided self-help is where you work through information and activities on your own. You’ll have regular support sessions.
Activities can include things like worksheets and writing about difficult thoughts and feelings.
Eating disorder service
Your GP may refer you for treatment to an eating disorder service. An eating disorder service will usually offer a structured programme of treatment which may include physical monitoring, dietetic advice and psychological treatment.
Freed has more information about
seeking help for an eating disorder
.
Psychological treatment for adults
Cognitive behavioural therapy
The main type of psychological treatment for bulimia nervosa is cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
CBT starts with the idea that thoughts, feelings, and behaviour are linked and affect one another. CBT aims to improve your eating behaviours. It tries to help you see how the ways you think, affect how you feel, and what you do.
Interpersonal psychotherapy
One alternative to CBT is interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT). IPT explores the way your relationships with people close to you impact the way you feel and how to improve these relationships.
Other psychological therapies include:
integrative cognitive affective therapy
schema therapy
The psychological therapies matrix for Bulimia Nervosa
explains what therapies are most likely to help you based on your needs and the current evidence.
Learn more about talking therapies
Psychological treatments for children and young people
Family Based Treatment (FBT) involves the whole family in solving their child or young person’s eating disorder. During FBT parents and carers are an essential part of the solution and members of the treatment team.
CBT may also be used. It can be tailored for young people experiencing bulimia nervosa.
If these treatments are not suitable then
psychodynamic psychotherapy
might be offered. This helps you understand how your current feelings and behaviour are shaped by your past experiences.
Medication
Antidepressants like
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
may be used to treat bulimia. They can reduce the urges to binge and purge and improve how you feel.
The medication will usually take several weeks before it starts to work. You’ll usually start on a low dose. The dose will gradually increase as your body adjusts to the medicine.
Very few types of medication are recommended for children and young people below the age of 16.
Relapse
Recovery from bulimia nervosa can take a long time but treatments are effective for many people.
Symptoms may return after treatment. This is often called a relapse, and is more likely during times of stress.
If relapse happens, the approach to getting treatment is the same. The first step is to go to your GP. Using the strategies you found useful before are likely to be helpful.
Complications of bulimia nervosa
There are physical complications associated with bulimia nervosa.
These can include:
dental problems – regular vomiting can cause your stomach acid to damage the enamel on your teeth, which can lead to tooth decay
repeated vomiting can cause bad breath and a
sore throat
your skin and hair can become dry and your fingernails can become brittle due to a lack of nutrients
your saliva glands can become swollen from frequent vomiting, which makes your face appear rounder than before
frequent use of
laxatives
can damage your bowel muscles, causing permanent constipation (finding it difficult to poo)
an increased risk of heart problems
Frequent vomiting or laxative use can cause:
tiredness
weakness
abnormal heart rhythms
kidney damage
convulsions (fits)
muscle spasms
Some of these symptoms are cause by an imbalance in your electrolytes, in particular, low potassium levels.
If you have
periods
, bulimia nervosa can cause them to become unpredictable, or stop altogether. This does not mean bulimia nervosa makes you infertile. While it may be harder to get pregnant while living with bulimia nervosa, you should continue to use birth control if you aren’t planning a pregnancy.
If you have
diabetes
, you’ll need regular health checks to help avoid problems with your eyes or other serious complications. This is particularly important if you have
type 1 diabetes
.
It’s common for people with bulimia nervosa to experience other mental health problems like depression.
Getting help for bulimia nervosa
People with bulimia nervosa can be anxious about seeking treatment but its important to get help as soon as possible.
Helping yourself
If you have eating problems or think you may have bulimia nervosa, it’s important to seek help as soon as possible.
You could start by:
talking to someone you trust, like a friend, member of your family or teacher
going to see your GP – you may find it helpful to bring someone with you for support
Beat has more information about
how to prepare for speaking to your GP and what to expect during your appointment
.
Helping someone else
If someone close to you is showing signs of bulimia nervosa, you can offer help and support.
You could try talking to them about how they feel, and encourage them to think about getting help. Try not to put pressure on them or be critical of them, as this could make things worse. You could also offer to help by going with the person to see their GP.
You could speak to your own GP or a healthcare professional if you’d like some advice on how to help someone.
You could also get help from an online or in person
support group
for people who have loved ones with eating disorders. Your GP or healthcare professional can help you find services suitable for you. If you’re at school your pastoral care team might also be able to help.
Read more about how to support someone with an eating disorder
Further support
Find information and services that can offer advice and support about eating disorders
Source:
Scottish Government