Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/injuries/skin-injuries/burns-and-scalds/

---

Burns and scalds
Burns and scalds are damage to the skin caused by heat.
A burn is caused by dry heat like an iron or fire. A scald is caused by something wet like hot water or steam.
The longer the burning goes on, the more severe the injury is likely to be.
Phone 999 or go to A&E for:
large burns that are bigger than the affected person’s hand
deep burns of any size that cause white or charred skin
burns on the face, neck, hands, feet, any joints, or genitals
all chemical and electrical burns
any other injuries that need treating
any signs of shock – symptoms include cold, clammy skin, sweating, rapid, shallow breathing, and weakness or dizziness
You should also go to hospital if you or the person who has a burn:
is under the age of 10
has a medical condition, like heart, lung or liver disease, or diabetes
has a weakened immune system – for example, because of HIV or AIDS, or because they’re having chemotherapy for cancer
has breathed in smoke or fumes
Symptoms of burns and scalds
The symptoms of a burn or scald will depend on how serious it is. Symptoms may include:
red skin
peeling skin
pain in the area of the burn
blisters
swelling
white or charred skin
First aid for burns and scalds
Burns and scalds must be treated with first aid as soon as possible. This will limit the amount of damage to the skin. You can do first aid for burns or scalds on yourself or someone else.
1. Remove anything from the burnt area
Do not try to remove anything that’s stuck to the burnt skin as this could cause more damage.
You should remove any clothing or jewellery from near the burnt area of skin. This includes babies nappies.
2. Cool the burn
Cool the burn with cold running water for 20 minutes. You should do this as soon as possible after the injury.
Never use ice, iced water, creams or greasy substances like butter on a burn.
3. Keep warm
Keep yourself or the injured person warm. You can use a blanket or layers of clothing to do this. But, avoid putting these on the injured area.
Keeping warm will prevent hypothermia. This is where a person’s body temperature drops below 35C (95F). This is a risk if you’re cooling a large burnt area, particularly in young children and elderly people.
4. Cover the burn with cling film
Put cling film in a layer over the burn. Do not wrap it around a limb. You can use a clean clear plastic bag for burns on your hand.
You should only use cling film for a short time until a burns dressing can be applied, if needed.
Putting cling film on a burn or scald can help to reduce the pain of it. It allows helps healthcare professionals to look at the burn.
5. Treat the pain with painkillers
Treat the pain from a burn with
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
.
Children under 16 years of age should not be given
aspirin
.
Treatment for burns and scalds
If your burn or scald needs treatment, your healthcare professional will:
look at the size and depth of the burn
clean the burn
cover the burn with a sterile dressing
offer you pain relief
They will check your dressing after 24 hours to see if there are any signs of infection. It will be changed again after 48 hours and then every 3 to 5 days until it’s completely healed.
You may have to have a tetanus injection after some burns. Tetanus is caused by bacteria entering a wound.
Recovering from mild burns and scalds
Minor burns normally heal in around 14 days and leave little scarring.
While the skin heals, keep the area clean and don’t apply any creams or greasy substances. Don’t burst any blisters as this can lead to infection.
If you have burnt the inside of your mouth by drinking something hot, avoid things that could irritate it. For example, hot and spicy food, alcohol and smoking.
Recovering from severe burns and scalds
A specialist may have to look at your burn if it’s severe. In some cases, a skin graft may be needed. This surgery removes the area of burnt skin and replaces it with a skin graft taken from another part of your body.
Deep or severe burns can take months or even years to heal fully. They usually leave some visible scarring.
Managing your exposure to the sun
During the first few years after a burn, you should try to avoid letting direct sun onto the damaged skin. This is because the sun may cause it to blister. The skin is especially sensitive in the first year after injury.
You should also avoid direct sun on a new area of skin after a skin graft.
Do
keep the area covered with cotton clothing
wear a peaked cap or wide-brimmed hat if the burn or scald is on your face
use sun cream with a high sun protection factor (SPF) to protect the area from the sun
Complications of burns and scalds
Burns and scalds can sometimes lead to other problems. This includes:
shock – when the body isn’t getting enough oxygen to the vital organs
heat exhaustion – when the temperature inside the body rises to 37 to 40C or above
infection – a blister that has burst may become infected if it’s not kept clean
scarring – this is a patch or line of tissue that remains after a wound has healed
Source:
NHS 24