Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/catarrh/

---

Catarrh
Catarrh is a build-up of mucus (phlegm) in your airways. It usually affects the back of the nose, the throat or the sinuses.
It’s often temporary, but some people experience it for months or years. This is known as chronic catarrh.
Catarrh is not harmful and there are treatments available.
Symptoms of catarrh
Catarrh can lead to a:
constant need to clear your throat
feeling that your throat is blocked
blocked or stuffy nose that you can’t clear
runny nose
feeling of mucus running down the back of your throat
persistent
cough
headache
facial pain
reduced sense of smell and taste
crackling sensation in your ear and some temporary hearing loss
These problems can be frustrating to live with. They may affect your sleep, making you feel tired.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
your catarrh is affecting your daily life
you have symptoms of catarrh for more than a few weeks
Diagnosing catarrh
Your GP may check if there’s a condition causing it like nasal polyps or
allergies
.
You may be referred to a specialist for tests.
Treatment for catarrh
Catarrh will often pass in a few days or weeks.
Treatment from your pharmacist
You can ask a pharmacist for:
advice about catarrh
over-the-counter medications such as
decongestants
, antihistamines or
steroid
nasal sprays
Find your nearest pharmacy
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Do
stay well hydrated
use a saline nasal rinse several times a day – these can be bought from a pharmacy or made at home with half a teaspoon of salt in a pint of boiled water that’s been left to cool
avoid things that trigger your symptoms, such as allergens or smoky places
avoid warm, dry atmospheres, such as places with air conditioning and car heating systems – placing plants or bowls of water in a room may help to keep the air humid
What causes catarrh?
Catarrh is usually caused by the immune system reacting to an infection or irritation. This causes the lining of your nose and throat to become swollen and produce mucus.
This can be triggered by:
a
cold
or other infections
hay fever
or other types of
allergic rhinitis
non-allergic rhinitis
nasal polyps
Treating the underlying condition, if you have one, may help your catarrh.
It’s unclear what causes chronic catarrh, but it’s often the result of an allergy or infection. It may be linked to an:
abnormality in the way mucus travels within the nose
increased sensitivity to mucus in the back of the nose and throat
Source:
Scottish Government