Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/cellulitis/

---

Cellulitis
Cellulitis is an infection of the deeper layers of skin and underlying tissue. It can be serious if it’s not treated quickly.
Early treatment with antibiotics can stop cellulitis becoming more serious.
Symptoms of cellulitis
Cellulitis causes an area of skin to suddenly become:
red
hot
swollen
painful
tender
It most often affects the lower legs, but can happen anywhere.
Cellulitis on your legs is usually on your lower legs.
Source: https://dermnetnz.org/
Cellulitis is an infection of the deeper layers of skin and the underlying tissue.
Source: dermnet.nz
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
You or someone else has cellulitis with:
a very high temperature, or you feel hot and shivery
a fast heartbeat or fast breathing
purple patches on your skin, but this may be less obvious on brown or black skin
feeling dizzy or faint
confusion or disorientation
cold, clammy or pale skin
unresponsiveness or loss of consciousness
symptoms that are getting rapidly worse
your face or the area around your eye is affected
a weak immune system – for example, because of HIV or chemotherapy
These are symptoms of serious complications, which can be life threatening.
Contact your GP practice immediately if:
your skin is painful, hot and swollen
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Treatment for cellulitis
You’ll usually be prescribed
antibiotics
for mild cellulitis on a small area of skin. You’ll usually need to take these for a week.
Your symptoms may get worse in the first 48 hours after treatment starts. This should start to improve soon afterwards.
Contact your GP practice if you don’t start to feel better 2 to 3 days after starting antibiotics.
It’s important to keep taking antibiotics until they’re finished, even when you feel better.
Most people make a full recovery after 7 to 10 days.
If cellulitis is severe, you might be referred to hospital for treatment.
Things you can do to help with cellulitis
As well as taking antibiotics, there are some things that can help your recovery.
Do
take
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
for the pain
raise the affected area on a chair or pillow when you’re sitting or lying down
try to move the joint near the affected area, like your wrist or ankle, to stop it getting stiff
drink plenty of fluids to avoid
dehydration
avoid wearing compression stockings until you’ve recovered
What causes cellulitis?
Cellulitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection. The bacteria can infect the deeper layers of your skin if it’s broken. For example, because of an insect bite or cut or if it’s cracked and dry.
The break in the skin may be so small it’s not noticeable.
You can’t catch cellulitis from another person as it affects the deeper layers of the skin.
Who’s most at risk of cellulitis?
Anyone can get cellulitis but you may be more at risk if you:
have poor circulation in your arms, legs, hands or feet
are overweight
find it difficult to move around
have a weakened immune system – for example, because of
HIV
or
chemotherapy
treatment
have
lymphoedema
– a condition that causes fluid to build up under your skin
inject drugs
have poorly controlled
diabetes
have a wound from surgery
have had cellulitis before
How to prevent cellulitis
If you’ve had cellulitis before, you’re more likely to get it again.
You can reduce the chances of getting cellulitis again by:
keeping skin clean and well moisturised
cleaning any cuts or wounds and using antiseptic cream
preventing cuts and scrapes by wearing appropriate clothing and footwear
wearing gloves if working outside
wash your hands regularly – particularly when treating or touching a wound or skin condition
Complications of cellulitis
Cellulitis can usually be treated successfully with antibiotics, and most people make a full recovery.
If cellulitis isn’t treated quickly, the infection can spread to other parts of the body, like the blood, muscles and bones.
Source:
NHS 24