Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/neck-and-back-problems-and-conditions/cervical-spondylosis/

---

Cervical spondylosis
This information may be useful for those who have been diagnosed with cervical spondylosis. People who are experiencing new or ongoing symptoms should visit their healthcare professional for assessment, diagnosis or treatment.
Read more about managing a neck problem
What is cervical spondylosis?
Cervical spondylosis is a medical term for age -related changes in the neck. It’s also known as neck osteoarthritis. As we get older, it is normal to have some age-related changes in our neck. Often this occurs with no symptoms.
The majority of people with cervical spondylosis on MRI scans and X-rays have no neck pain. In some people however, it can cause neck pain and stiffness.
Speak to your GP urgently if:
You have experienced a new onset or significant worsening of the following symptoms:
changes to bladder and bowel function like urgency, frequency, difficulty passing urine, leaking, incontinence
changes to sensation around the bottom and or genitals or sexual dysfunction e.g. recent inability to achieve orgasm or erection
reduced balance or difficulty walking
pain, weakness, heaviness or changing sensation in the arms or legs
clumsy hands e.g. dropping things, struggling with handwriting, buttons or zips
if your neck pain is associated with a severe headache
Phone 111 if your GP practice is closed.
Speak to your GP if you have neck pain:
and you also feel generally unwell
that starts when you are ill with other problems like rheumatoid arthritis or cancer
Symptoms of cervical spondylosis
Symptoms caused by cervical spondylosis can change from day to day. They can include:
neck pain
neck stiffness
muscle tightness or spasms
clicking and grinding – this is quite common and can sound alarming but is not usually serious
headaches which usually start at the back of the head
pain, pins and needles or numbness in your arm – this can be caused by nerve irritation in your neck
Diagnosing cervical spondylosis
Cervical spondylosis is diagnosed after an assessment by a healthcare professional.
They’ll ask you questions then carry out a physical examination. This may include checking your range of movement and strength.
You may need to have a further examination to rule out other possible health conditions.
Usually X-rays and MRIs are not required to diagnose cervical spondylosis. A lot of people over 40 will have signs of cervical spondylosis on their scans but won’t have any symptoms. For most people, investigations are unnecessary, as they will not change your treatment options.
Treatment of cervical spondylosis
Being diagnosed with cervical spondylosis does not necessarily mean you will have permanent neck pain. There are lots things you can do to help your symptoms.
Exercise
Gentle exercises can help keep your neck moving. Exercises increase the blood flow to the tissues and helps with healing.
Exercises may be uncomfortable to start but they are safe to do. They’ll become much easier as you get movement back. Its known that being afraid of moving can worsen your pain. Any movement can be helpful.
Read more about exercises for cervical spondylosis
Pain management
Pain medication can help you move more comfortably, which can help manage your symptoms.
More about taking painkillers
Heat or ice packs
Using heat or ice on your neck can help reduce symptoms. Use a barrier, like a towel, to protect your skin from a burn. Never place heat or ice directly on your skin. Leave a few hours between treatments.
How to avoid hot water bottle burns and scalds – Care of Burns in Scotland
You should stop treating the area with heat or ice if you notice an increase in redness, discolouration or blistering of the skin.
Read more about burns and scalds
If you have any issues with circulation or sensation, you shouldn’t use heat or ice as a treatment for neck pain.
Lifestyle
Things that you do day-to-day can impact your pain levels.
Lifestyle advice includes:
staying active
modifying activities and pacing techniques
maintaining a healthy weight
stopping smoking
managing stress
and
emotional wellbeing
Work
Cervical spondylosis can sometimes mean you need to take some time off work. How long you’re off will depend on the nature of your condition and your role at work.
You do not need to be symptom free before you consider returning to work. Continuing to go to work, or returning to work as soon as is possible for you, will help your recovery. Gradually getting back to your normal daily activities can help to build up your strength and stamina levels.
Help and support
Following this advice, you should see gradual improvements over time.
You should see the biggest change in your symptoms within the first couple of weeks. Most flare-ups should have improved within 8 weeks.
If your neck pain hasn’t improved within 8 weeks of following this advice, or if your symptoms get worse at any time, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Read about how to access MSK services
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group