Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/chest-infection/

---

Chest infection
Chest infections are common, especially after a
cold
or
flu
during autumn and winter.
Although most are mild and get better on their own, some can be serious or even life-threatening.
Signs and symptoms of a chest infection
The main symptoms of a chest infection can include:
a persistent
cough
coughing up yellow or green phlegm (thick mucus), or coughing up blood
breathlessness
or rapid and shallow breathing
wheezing
a high temperature (fever)
a rapid heartbeat
chest pain or tightness
feeling confused and disorientated
You may also experience more general symptoms of an infection, such as a
headache
, fatigue, sweating, loss of appetite, or joint and muscle pain.
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
you have severe
chest pain
in the middle of your chest that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
Contact your GP urgently if you:
are more short of breath than usual
have pain when breathing in or coughing
are feeling confused, dizzy, or lightheaded
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
are coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
have
heart palpitations
– this may feel like your heart is racing, going too slowly or skipping a beat or like a fluttering feeling in
are peeing less than usual – this can be a sign of
dehydration
have a very high or low temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or you’re shivering
If your GP is closed, phone 111.
Speak to your GP practice if:
you have breathlessness which is not improving
you have had a
cough
for more than 3 weeks
you have a
fever
your symptoms are not improving or they are affecting your daily life
Your GP should be able to diagnose you based on your symptoms and by listening to your chest using a stethoscope (a medical instrument used to listen to the heart and lungs).
In some cases, further tests – such as a chest
X-ray
, breathing tests and testing phlegm or
blood samples
– may be needed.
What causes chest infections?
A chest infection is an infection of the lungs or airways. The main types of chest infection are
bronchitis
and
pneumonia
.
Most bronchitis cases are caused by viruses, whereas most pneumonia cases are due to bacteria.
These infections are usually spread when an infected person coughs or sneezes. This launches tiny droplets of fluid containing the virus or bacteria into the air, where they can be breathed in by others.
The infections can also be spread to others if you cough or sneeze onto your hand, an object or a surface, and someone else shakes your hand or touches those surfaces before touching their mouth or nose.
Certain groups of people have a higher risk of developing serious chest infections, such as:
babies and very young children
children with developmental problems
people who are very overweight
elderly people
pregnant women
people who smoke
people with long-term health conditions, such as
asthma
,
heart disease
,
diabetes
,
kidney disease
,
cystic fibrosis
or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
people with a weakened immune system – this could be due to a recent illness, a transplant, high-dose steroids,
chemotherapy
or a health condition, such as an undiagnosed
HIV
infection
Read more about the
causes of bronchitis
and the
causes of pneumonia
Caring for your symptoms at home
Many chest infections aren’t serious and get better within a few days or weeks. You won’t usually need to see your GP, unless your symptoms suggest you have a more serious infection.
While you recover at home, there are things you can do to improve your symptoms.
Do
get plenty of rest
drink lots of fluid to prevent dehydration and to loosen the mucus in your lungs, making it easier to cough up
treat headaches, fever and aches and pains with pain relief such as paracetamol or ibuprofen
drink a warm drink of honey and lemon to relieve a sore throat caused by persistent coughing
raise your head up with extra pillows while you’re sleeping to make breathing easier
stop smoking if you smoke
Avoid cough medicines, as there’s little evidence they work. Coughing actually helps you clear the infection more quickly by getting rid of the phlegm from your lungs.
Antibiotics
aren’t recommended for many chest infections, because they only work if the infection is caused by bacteria, rather than a virus.
Your GP will usually only prescribe antibiotics if they think you have pneumonia, or you’re at risk of complications such as fluid building up around the lungs (
pleurisy
).
If there’s a flu outbreak in your local area and you’re at risk of serious infection, your GP may also prescribe antiviral medication.
Read more about
treating bronchitis
and
treating pneumonia
Preventing chest infections
There are measures you can take to help reduce your risk of developing chest infections and stop them spreading to others.
Stop smoking
If you smoke, one of the best things you can do to prevent a chest infection is to stop. Smoking damages your lungs and weakens your defences against infection.
Read more information and advice about
stopping smoking
Good hygiene
Although chest infections generally aren’t as contagious as other common infections, like flu, you can pass them on to others through coughing and sneezing.
Therefore, it’s important to cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze, and to wash your hands regularly. Put tissues in the bin immediately.
Alcohol and diet
Excessive and prolonged
alcohol misuse
can weaken your lungs’ natural defences against infections and make you more vulnerable to chest infections.
To keep your risk of alcohol-related harm low, the NHS recommends:
not regularly drinking more than 14 units of alcohol a week
if you drink as much as 14 units a week, it’s best to spread this evenly over 3 or more days
if you’re trying to reduce the amount of alcohol you drink, it’s a good idea to have several alcohol-free days each week
Regular or frequent drinking means drinking alcohol most weeks. The risk to your health is increased by drinking any amount of alcohol on a regular basis.
Eating a healthy, balanced diet can help strengthen the immune system, making you less vulnerable to developing chest infections.
Read more about
healthy eating
and
tips on cutting down on alcohol
Vaccinations
If you’re at an increased risk of chest infections, your GP may recommend being vaccinated against flu and pneumococcal infections (a bacterium that can cause pneumonia).
These vaccinations should help to reduce your chances of getting chest infections in the future.
Flu and pneumococcal vaccinations are usually recommended for:
babies and young children
pregnant women (flu jab only)
people aged 65 and over
people with long-term health conditions or weakened immune systems
Source:
NHS 24