Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/chest-and-rib-problems-and-conditions/chest-and-rib-injury/

---

Chest and rib injury
This information is for people who have sustained an injury to your chest or rib area.
Chest and rib injuries are common and can be caused by:
a fall
a blow or impact to the chest or ribs
Most injuries can be safely managed at home without the need to see a healthcare professional. For most rib or chest injuries, you’ll not need an
X-ray
.
Phone 999 if:
you’ve had a new injury to the chest and:
you’ve have breathing difficulties that are worsening
you’re coughing up blood
Phone 111 if:
you’ve had a new injury within the last 7 days, for example a fall from height or direct impact to the chest or ribs and:
you have an increased shortness of breath or new breathing difficulties
there’s a change in shape of the rib area like lumps or dents
your pain levels are preventing you from breathing deeply
there is pain in your abdomen or shoulder since the injury
you have a new cough
you’re coughing up yellow or green mucus (phlegm)
you start to feel generally unwell
you are taking medication that can thin your blood or prevent clotting like blood thinners, anti-coagulants or
NSAIDs like aspirin or naproxen
you have any condition that affects your bone health like
osteoporosis
Symptoms of a chest or rib injury
Rib and chest injuries can cause a range of symptoms including:
pain
bruising
swelling
clicking in the chest
It’s typical with this type of injury to have increased pain when:
taking a deep breath
coughing
laughing
sneezing
moving a certain way
What can I do to help my chest or rib injury?
There are lots of things you can do yourself to manage your injury and any pain you’re experiencing.
Managing your pain
Managing your pain is one of the most effective ways to help your recovery.
Regular pain medication can help to reduce the pain. It can also help you take deep breaths and sleep more comfortably.
If over the counter medication is ineffective it’s a good idea to talk to your healthcare professional.
More about taking painkillers
Preventing a chest infection
Your risk of getting a chest infection is higher after a chest or rib injury. To help prevent this it’s recommended you do some breathing exercises. These help your lungs expand fully.
If you’ve injured your chest or ribs you should try to do these exercises every hour while you’re awake. Do this until you can breathe freely without pain.
Aim to take a deep breath in, hold for 4 seconds and then a slow, relaxed breath out. You should try to do this 4 times each hour. Try and do these sitting upright.
How to cough with a chest or rib injury
Coughing when you have a chest or rib injury can be painful. Rather than coughing as you would normally, try to use a huff instead.
A huff is a fast breath out, like you would do to steam up a pair of glasses or mirror.
Do 2 or 3 huffs at a time after breathing exercises. This should help make it easier for you to cough up any phlegm. It may help to reduce your pain to hug a pillow or cushion to your chest as you do this.
Sleeping after a chest or rib injury
You might need to change how you sleep. You might find it more comfortable to sleep in an upright position supported by more pillows. Try to return to a normal sleeping position after a few days.
If you wear a bra, it may be helpful to wear it when sleeping as some people find this more comfortable. You could try a soft bra without an underwire.
Keeping active during your recovery
Keeping active is an essential part of your recovery. Try to increase your activity gradually.
It’s best to avoid long periods of bed rest.
Pacing your activity levels
It’s normal for these injuries to be painful and limit your movement. However, too much rest can slow down your recovery.
As soon as you can, start moving and using the affected area. A little movement or activity is better than nothing.
Movement is likely to be painful to start with.
You don’t need to be pain free to start moving, Try to keep your activities within a manageable pain level for you.
How to tell if you’re moving at the right level
To help you pace your activities at the right level, you can rate your pain out of 10. On this scale 0 is no pain, 10 being the worst pain you’ve ever had, for example:
0 to 3 – minimal pain
4 to 5 – acceptable pain
6 to 10 – excessive pain
Pain during and after activity
Activity can increase discomfort as your body gets used to regaining your activity levels.
Aim to keep your pain within a rating of 0 to 5. If your pain gets above this level, you can change the level of activity by:
reducing the number of times you do a movement
reducing the pace of an activity
increasing rest time between activities
Recovery timescales
Most of the healing happens between 6 to 8 weeks after your injury.
It’s normal to have aches and discomfort beyond this. This usually happens when you try activities you haven’t done for a while. It’s also normal for the area to be more sensitive for a while after the injury.
Driving
You should contact your insurance provider before driving. Your injury may affect your insurance.
You must be able to safely perform an emergency stop or manoeuvre. You should always be in full control of your vehicle.
Work
Your return to work will depend on the type of work you do and your employer. It may be possible to discuss a phased return to work or changed duties initially.
You don’t need to see a healthcare professional to return to work unless you require
a fit note
.
Falls
It’s very common for a rib or chest injury to happen after a fall. There are many things that can
increase your risk of falling
.
Further advice about preventing falls
Help and support
Speak to a healthcare professional if:
your symptoms haven’t improved within 8 weeks of following this advice
your symptoms are worsening
Find out
how to access MSK services in your area
.
When dealing with any health condition it’s important to also look after
your mental wellbeing
as this can impact your recovery.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group