Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/copd/chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease/

---

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a collection of lung diseases. It includes chronic bronchitis, emphysema and chronic obstructive airways disease.
People with COPD have difficulties breathing.
COPD does not usually become noticeable until after the age of 35. Most people diagnosed with the condition are over 50 years old.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
you feel more breathlessness when exercising or moving around
you have a cough with mucus (phlegm) that never seems to go away
you get
chest infections
often, particularly in winter
you’re wheezing
you’re a smoker, or used to be a smoker and you have a persistent chesty cough, especially in the morning
you have COPD and you’re having a flare-up (particularly bad symptoms) that’s worse than normal
Chest pain and coughing up blood (haemoptysis) are not common symptoms of COPD.
Diagnosing COPD
It’s important that COPD is diagnosed as early as possible.
Your GP may:
ask about your symptoms
ask whether you smoke, or used to smoke
listen to your chest using a stethoscope
weigh you to measure your body mass index (BMI)
check how well your lungs are working with a breathing test called spirometry
want to rule out other conditions with tests like a chest
X-ray
or blood test
You may need more tests to confirm you have COPD or check how severe it is. These tests may include:
an electrocardiogram (ECG) or echocardiogram to check the condition of your heart
peak flow tests to measure how fast you can breathe out, and rule out asthma
a blood oxygen level test using a pulse oximeter (looks like a peg attached to your finger) to see if extra oxygen would help you
a blood test to check if you have a genetic tendency to COPD (alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency)
a
computerised tomography (CT) scan
to see any changes to the lung
more detailed lung function tests than spirometry (you may be referred to a hospital for these)
a phlegm sample to check for infection
Treatment for COPD
There is currently no cure for COPD. But the sooner treatment is started, the less chance there is of complications and flare-ups. Damage to your lungs that has already happened cannot be reversed. But you can slow COPD down and feel better with treatment, especially by
stopping smoking
.
NHS Scotland recommends you get the
coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccine
,
flu vaccine
and
pneumococcal vaccine
when offered them.
Treatments for COPD usually involve relieving the symptoms with medication. For example, by using an inhaler to make breathing easier. Pulmonary rehabilitation may also help increase the amount of exercise you can do.
Surgery is only an option for a small number of people with COPD and lung transplant for people under 60.
Stop smoking
Stopping smoking
is the best way for people with COPD to help themselves feel better.
Stopping smoking at an early stage of the disease makes a huge difference. Any damage already done to the airways cannot be reversed. But giving up smoking can slow the rate at which the condition worsens.
Inhalers
If an inhaler is prescribed for you, your healthcare professional can explain how to use it.
Watch Asthma + Lung UK’s videos on how to use your inhaler
Short-acting bronchodilator inhalers
Short-acting bronchodilator inhalers give a small dose of medicine directly to your lungs. This causes the muscles in your airways to relax and open up.
There are 2 types of short-acting bronchodilator inhaler:
beta-2 agonist inhalers, such as salbutamol and terbutaline
antimuscarinic inhalers, such as ipratropium
The inhaler should be used when you feel breathless to relieve the symptoms.
Long-acting bronchodilator inhalers
If a short-acting bronchodilator inhaler does not help your symptoms, your GP may recommend a long-acting bronchodilator inhaler. This works in a similar way to a short-acting bronchodilator, but each dose lasts for at least 12 hours.
There are 2 types of long-acting bronchodilator inhalers:
beta-2 agonist inhalers, such as salmeterol, formoterol, vilanterol and indacaterol
antimuscarinic inhalers, such as tiotropium, glycopyrronium and aclidinium
You’ll usually be given a combination of these.
Steroid inhalers
Steroid inhalers, also called corticosteroid inhalers, can help to reduce the frequency of exacerbations or flare ups in some people with COPD.
Used inhalers
There is no recycling scheme available for used inhalers. You should return all your used or expired inhalers to your
community pharmacy
for safe disposal. Spacers should be replaced each year if used regularly. Old spacers go into the household bin.
Inhalers and the environment
Using your preventer inhaler correctly and keeping your symptoms under control is good for your health and the environment. Some inhalers have a lower carbon footprint and are
better for the environment
than others. The best inhaler is one that works well for you. Speak to your healthcare professional about whether lower global warming potential inhalers would be right for you.
Medicines
You may be prescribed medicines such as:
mucolytic tablets or capsules to make your phlegm easier to cough up – these are good for people with lots of thick phlegm or who have frequent or bad flare-ups
antibiotics
if you have a chest infection
steroid tablets
if you have a bad flare-up
Other types of treatment
Other types of treatment include:
nebulised medication (for severe cases where inhalers have not worked) – a large dose of medicine is taken through a mouthpiece or a face mask
oxygen therapy
(if your oxygen levels are low) – taking oxygen through tubes in your nose or through a mask
non-invasive ventilation (NIV) – helps you breathe using a portable machine connected to a mask covering the nose or face
pulmonary rehabilitation programmes – exercise and education to help people with chronic lung problems, you can ask your healthcare professional if this is available
What causes COPD?
Causes of COPD include:
genetics (COPD-G)
abnormal lung development, early life events, premature birth, low birth weight, neonatal ventilation (COPD-D)
smoking including in utero (from before birth), passive smoking, vaping, cannabis (COPD-C)
pollution from outdoor air, wildfire smoke, occupational hazards, household pollution (COPD-P)
infections (COPD-I)
unknown cause (COPD-U)
The main cause of COPD is smoking. The more you smoke, and the longer you’ve been smoking, the more likely you are to develop COPD. This is because smoking irritates and inflames the lungs, and prevents them functioning normally, which results in scarring. Passive (second-hand) smoke can also cause COPD.
Over many years, the inflammation leads to permanent changes in the lung. The walls of the airways thicken and more phlegm is produced. Damage to the delicate walls of the air sacs in the lungs causes emphysema and the lungs lose their normal elasticity. The smaller airways also become scarred and narrowed. These changes cause the symptoms of breathlessness, cough and phlegm associated with COPD.
Source:
Scottish Government