Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/chest-and-rib-problems-and-conditions/clavicle-collar-bone-fracture/

---

Clavicle (collar bone) fracture
Your injury may be referred to as a fracture, break or crack. These terms all mean the same thing.
When you have a fracture, it’s not just the bone that’s affected. You’ll also have injured some of the soft tissues around it. Soft tissues include the:
muscles
ligaments
tendons
nerves
A clavicle (collar bone) fracture.
Recovery times
A clavicle fracture can take between 6 to 12 weeks to heal.
It’s normal to have aches and discomfort beyond this. It’s also common for the area to be more sensitive for several months afterwards.
What can affect your recovery?
There are some things that might affect your recovery.
Smoking
Smoking affects all your tissues and slows facture healing times. In some people, it can stop healing altogether.
Stopping smoking as your fracture heals will help to ensure the best recovery.
Get help to stop smoking.
General health
Some medical conditions, like diabetes, may slow down the healing process.
Eating a healthy diet and keeping yourself active will help your recovery.
Medication
Some medications can slow down fracture healing. If you have concerns about your medication talk to a healthcare professional.
Anti-inflammatory medication, like Ibuprofen or Naproxen, have been shown to delay healing.
What to expect after a clavicle fracture
It’s common for a lump to form around the injured area at your collar bone as the healing takes place. In many cases this will remain after your clavicle has healed. You don’t need to seek help for this unless there is a change to the lump.
Following your X-ray and diagnosis, your fracture will be managed in a Poly Sling.
Rehabilitation plan
There are things you can do to help your recovery after a clavicle fracture.
0 to 3 weeks after your injury
Just after your injury, you should:
wear sling during the day except for exercises and personal hygiene
choose whether to wear your sling at night
start some exercises for your shoulder
avoid lifting your elbow above shoulder height as this may be painful
3 to 6 weeks after your injury
Between 3 to 6 weeks after your injury, you should:
try not to use your sling
begin normal light activities with your arm and shoulder
increase movement
avoid heavy lifting
6 to 12 weeks after your injury
The injury should be healed between 6 to 12 weeks but heavy tasks may cause discomfort.
You should aim to:
resume normal day to day activities but be guided by any pain that you experience – stop if movements become painful
start to lift your arm overhead
avoid contact sport until at least 12 weeks after the injury
Help and support
If your collar bone hasn’t improved within 6 weeks of following this advice, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Swelling after a fracture
It’s normal to have swelling near the fracture site. It often spreads down your arm.
Swelling can sometimes last for months. The amount of swelling can also change depending on:
your position
your activity
the time of day
It’s important that swelling is managed well to help your recovery.
How to manage swelling after a fracture
To help reduce the swelling you should:
keep the other joints in your arm moving normally
find a balance between rest and activity
Use self massage to reduce swelling – gently use your fingertips to push the fluid towards your shoulder
Bruising after a fracture
It’s normal to have bruising after a fracture.
Bruising can be widespread and may appear a long way from your fracture. It can be very purple to start with and may change colour as you recover.
Pain after a fracture
It’s normal to have some discomfort in the areas around your fracture. The areas affected can be:
other soft tissues
nearby joints
areas that have been immobilised
Pain can change from day to day and it doesn’t always depend on what you’re doing. It’s common to have pain at rest.
It’s normal to have some pain even when your fracture has healed. Some people also experience discomfort in the fracture site during colder weather.
Your local pharmacy can give you advice on managing pain after a fracture.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Getting back to normal activities
There are some things you should consider when trying to get back to your normal activities.
Driving
You should contact your insurance provider before driving. Your injury may affect your insurance.
Once you’re out of your sling, you must be able to safely perform an emergency stop or manoeuvre.
You should always be in full control of your vehicle.
Work
Your return to work will depend on the type of work you do and your employer. It may be possible to discuss a phased return to work or changed duties.
You don’t need to see a healthcare professional to return to work.
Daily activities
Keep doing any activities you’re able to, and as your pain allows. Gradually increase what you do.
Reduced flexibility and strength may make things more difficult to start with. This will get better as you slowly build up to all your usual activities.
Mood
Frustration or
low mood
after an injury is normal. As you get back to normal life this should get better.
Falls
It can be common for a clavicle (collar bone) fracture to happen if you fall. It’s important to know why you had a fall. It’s also important to learn how to improve your strength and balance to help prevent falls in the future.
Get advice about preventing falls
Bone health
Osteoporosis
is a condition that causes the bones to become weaker and can put you more at risk of fracture.
Fractures related to osteoporosis are often called fragility fractures and are caused by a minor trauma. For example, a small fall or bump that wouldn’t normally lead to a fracture.
Healthcare professionals may check if you’re fracture is caused by osteoporosis. This is normal if you:
are over the age of 50
have any risk factors for fracture
If you’re worried that you may be at risk of fragility fractures, speak to your GP practice. They’ll be able to offer you further advice.
Find out more about diagnosing osteoporosis and risk factors for it
Exercises for your shoulder
You can practice exercises for your injured shoulder.
You should aim to do these exercises 4 to 5 times a day.
Try exercises for shoulder problems
Stop these movements if they make your symptoms worse, or cause new pain.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group