Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mouth/cold-sore/

---

Cold sore
Cold sores are small blisters that develop on the lips or around the mouth. They’re caused by the herpes simplex virus (HSV). A cold sore will usually clear up without treatment within 7 to 10 days.
Symptoms of cold sores
You may not have any symptoms when you first become infected with HSV (the primary infection).
An outbreak of cold sores may occur later and keep coming back (recurrent infection).
However, if the primary infection does cause symptoms, they can be quite severe.
In children
Symptoms of the primary infection are most likely to develop in children younger than 5 years old. These include:
swollen and irritated gums with small, painful sores in and around the mouth – this is known as herpes simplex gingivostomatitis
sore throat
and
swollen glands
producing more saliva than normal
high temperature (fever)
of 38C (100.4F) or above
dehydration
feeling sick (nausea)
headaches
Herpes simplex gingivostomatitis usually affects young children, but adults can also develop it. It can last 7 to 14 days, with the sores taking up to 3 weeks to heal. However, gingivostomatitis doesn’t usually happen after the primary infection.
In adults
Symptoms of the primary infection are rare in adults but are similar to those experienced by children.
You’ll usually have a
sore throat
with or without
swollen glands
. You may also have bad breath (halitosis) and painful sores in and around your mouth. These can develop into
ulcers
with grey or yellow centres.
If you develop HSV at an early age, it may be triggered periodically in later life and can cause recurring bouts of cold sores. After the primary infection, the symptoms are usually reduced to just the cold sores themselves.
When to get medical advice
If you have cold sores you can get advice and treatment directly from a pharmacy.
Your pharmacist may recommend that you speak to your GP if required.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Speak to your GP practice if:
the cold sore has not started to heal within 10 days
you’re worried about a cold sore or think it’s something else
the cold sore is very large or painful
you or your child have swollen, painful gums and sores in the mouth (gingivostomatitis)
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because of
chemotherapy
,
diabetes
, or
HIV
Treatment for a cold sore
Things you can do
Do
eat cool, soft foods
wash your hands with soap and water before and after applying cream
avoid anything that triggers your cold sores
use sunblock lip balm (SPF 15 or above) if you’re outside in the sun
use an antiseptic mouthwash if brushing your teeth is painful
take
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
to ease pain and swelling (both come in liquid form for young children) – do not give aspirin to children under 16
drink plenty of fluids to avoid
dehydration
Don’t
do not kiss anyone while you have a cold sore
do not have oral sex until your cold sore completely heals
do not touch your cold sore (apart from applying cream) – if you do, wash your hands
do not rub cream into the cold sore – dab it on instead
do not eat acidic or salty foods if they make your cold sore feel worse
Treatment from a pharmacist
If you get cold sores, a pharmacist may recommend:
creams to ease pain and irritation
antiviral creams to speed up the healing time
cold sore patches to protect the skin while it heals
You can buy electronic devices from
pharmacies
that treat cold sores with light or lasers. Some people find these helpful, but there have not been many studies to confirm if they work.
If you regularly get cold sores, use antiviral creams as soon as you recognise the early tingling feeling. They do not always work after blisters appear.
Treatment from a GP
If your cold sores are very large, painful and keep coming back, your GP may prescribe antiviral tablets.
Newborn babies, pregnant women and people with a weakened immune system who have cold sores may be referred to hospital for advice or treatment.
What causes cold sores
Cold sores are usually caused by the herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1).
In most cases, the virus is passed on in early childhood. For example, when a child is kissed by a family member or friend with a cold sore.
The virus passes through the skin and travels up the nerves, where it lies inactive (dormant) until it’s triggered at a later date.
Cold sore triggers
Things that can trigger a cold sore outbreak include:
having another infection, such as a respiratory tract infection
having a
high temperature (fever)
emotional upset or psychological
stress
tiredness and fatigue
an injury to the affected area
menstruation (periods)
strong sunlight
However, in many cases, there’s no obvious trigger for an outbreak.
Herpes simplex virus type 2
Sometimes, cold sores can be caused by the herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2).
This can happen after having oral sex with someone who has
genital herpes
, which is usually caused by HSV-2.
In genital herpes, painful blisters develop on your genitals and the surrounding area.
Preventing infection
It’s not possible to prevent infection with the herpes simplex virus or prevent outbreaks of cold sores. However, there are things you can do to minimise the spread of infection.
Cold sores are at their most contagious when they burst (rupture), but remain contagious until they’re completely healed. Avoid close contact with others until your cold sore has completely healed and disappeared.
However, there’s no need to stay away from work or miss school if you or your child have a cold sore.
Complications of cold sores
Cold sores are usually mild, but may cause complications in rare cases. People with weak immune systems caused by illness or treatments such as
chemotherapy
are particularly at risk of complications.
Dehydration
sometimes occurs if drinking fluids becomes painful. Young children are particularly at risk of becoming dehydrated.
Other complications of cold sores include:
skin infections – these often happen if the virus comes into contact with broken skin, such as a
cut or graze
, or a skin condition such as
eczema
herpetic whitlow (whitlow finger) – this causes painful sores and blisters to appear on and around your fingers
herpetic keratoconjunctivitis – this causes swelling and irritation (inflammation) of your eye area and sores to develop on your eyelids
Source:
NHS 24