Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/coma/

---

Coma
A coma is a state of unconsciousness where a person is unresponsive and cannot be woken.
It can result from injury to the brain, like a
severe head injury
or
stroke
. There are also a range of conditions that can cause a coma.
A patient may be placed into a coma while in the intensive care unit (ICU) as part of their treatment. This might be called an ‘induced coma’.
What is a coma?
Someone who’s in a coma is unconscious and has minimal brain activity. They’re alive, but cannot be woken up and show no signs of being aware.
The person’s eyes may be closed, and they’ll appear to be unresponsive to their environment. They may not respond to sound or pain, or be able to communicate or move voluntarily.
Someone in a coma may also have very reduced basic reflexes, like coughing and swallowing. They may be able to breathe on their own, although some people require a machine (a ventilator), and a breathing tube to keep their airway open.
Over time, someone in a coma may start to gradually regain consciousness and become more aware. Some people will wake up – the length of time a person spends in a coma can vary from days to months. Other patients may never regain consciousness and wake up.
Caring for and monitoring a person in a coma
Doctors assess a person’s level of consciousness using a tool called the
Glasgow Coma Scale
. This level is monitored constantly for signs of improvement or deterioration. The Glasgow Coma Scale assesses 3 things:
eye opening
verbal response to a command
voluntary movements in response to a command
In the short term, a person in a coma will normally be looked after in an ICU. Their treatment will include:
supporting their bodily functions (like breathing)
treating the underlying cause of the coma
In the longer term, healthcare staff will give supportive treatment on a hospital ward. This can involve:
providing nutrition (things like vitamins, protein and water that everyone needs to survive)
trying to prevent infections
preventing bedsores by moving the person
gently exercising their joints to stop them becoming tight
If someone is in a coma for a long time, they may have a tracheostomy put in to keep their airway open. This allows them to receive better mouth care (for example, toothbrushing) and means they can be moved to a long-term ward for supportive care.
What you can do as a visitor
The experience of being in a coma differs from person to person. Some people feel they can remember events that happened around them while they were in a coma. Others have no memory of events.
People can have false memories from the time they were in a coma. They can also experience dreams and flashbacks after they’ve recovered.
Some people have reported feeling enormous reassurance from the presence of a loved one when coming out of a coma.
When visiting someone who is in a coma, it can be helpful to:
announce who you are when you arrive
talk to the patient as you normally would
be aware that everything you say in front of them might be heard
show them your love and support – sitting and holding their hand or stroking their skin can be a great comfort
If a loved one is in a coma, it can be helpful to keep a diary where you record things like news stories, family events and information about their care. Many ICUs do this already, so you can talk to the staff about keeping a diary when you visit.
Recovering from a coma
A coma can last for a prolonged period of time. The person might:
start to gradually wake up and gain consciousness
progress into a vegetative state (where a person is awake but shows no sign of being aware of their surroundings or themselves)
progress into a minimally conscious state
Some people may recover from these states gradually. Others may not improve for years, if at all.
People who do wake up from a coma usually come round gradually. They may be very agitated and confused to begin with.
Some people will make a full recovery and be completely unaffected by the coma. Others will have disabilities caused by the damage to their brain. They may need physiotherapy,
occupational therapy
, psychological assessment, and support while they’re recovering. They may also need care for the rest of their lives.
The chances of someone fully recovering from a coma depend on:
the severity of their brain injury
the cause of their brain injury
their age
how long they’ve been in a coma
how physically fit they were before the coma
It’s impossible to accurately predict how long a coma will last, whether someone will recover, and if they’ll have any long-term problems.
Further information and support
Further information and support for people with a loved one in a coma is available from:
the
Brain and Spine Foundation
Headway
: the brain injury association
ICUsteps
: the intensive care patient support charity
Source:
NHS 24