Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/common-cold/

---

Common cold
A cold is a very common mild viral infection. You can often treat a cold without seeing a GP. You should begin to feel better in about 1 to 2 weeks.
There is a separate page on
if your child has cold or flu symptoms
.
Symptoms of a cold
The main symptoms of a cold include:
a
sore throat
a blocked or runny nose
sneezing
a
cough
a hoarse voice
generally feeling unwell
Less common symptoms of a cold include:
high temperature (fever) – this is usually about 37°C to 39°C (98.6°F to 102.2°F)
a
headache
earache
– severe earache may be a sign of a
middle ear infection
muscle aches
loss of taste and smell
mild irritation of your eyes
a feeling of pressure in your ears and face
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if you or your child:
are more short of breath than usual
have pain when breathing in or coughing
feel confused, dizzy or lightheaded
have a very high or low temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or you’re shivering
have had a fever for more than 3 days
have symptoms that are not improving or they are affecting your daily life
have a long-term medical condition – for example,
diabetes
, or a heart, lung or kidney condition
have a weakened immune system – for example, because you’re having
chemotherapy
If your GP is closed, phone 111.
Speak to a pharmacist if you have a cold and would like advice and treatment.
Find your local pharmacy
Treatment for a cold
There’s no cure for a cold, but there are things you can do to look after yourself at home. You should begin to feel better in about 1 to 2 weeks.
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Do
rest
drink plenty of fluids
eat healthily
take over-the-counter pain relief, such as
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
, to relieve high temperature and aches
use
decongestant
sprays or tablets to relieve a blocked nose
try remedies such as gargling salt water and sucking on menthol sweets
Always read the leaflet that comes with your medicine before taking it. Follow the recommended dosage instructions. If you’re not sure which treatments are suitable for you or your child,
speak to a pharmacist
for advice.
Be careful not to use cough and cold medicines if you’re taking paracetamol and ibuprofen tablets. Cough and cold medicines often also contain paracetamol and ibuprofen so it can be easy to take more than the recommended dose.
How do colds spread?
A person can start spreading a cold from a few days before their symptoms start until their symptoms have gone.
You can catch the virus from an infectious person by:
touching an object or surface contaminated by infected droplets and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes
touching the skin of someone who has the infected droplets on their skin and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes
breathing in tiny droplets of fluid that contain the cold virus – these are launched into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes
Different viruses can cause a cold. It’s possible to have different colds one after the other, as each one may be caused by a different virus.
How to prevent a cold from spreading
Do
wash your hands often, especially before touching your nose or mouth and before handling food
always sneeze and cough into tissues
throw away used tissues straight away and wash your hands
clean surfaces regularly
use your own cup, plates, cutlery and kitchen utensils
do not share towels or toys with someone who has a cold
Is it a cold or flu?
It can sometimes be difficult to tell if you have a cold or flu, as the symptoms can be similar. The main differences are that flu symptoms:
come on quickly
usually include a headache, high temperature (fever) and sore muscles
make you feel too unwell to continue your usual activities
Cold symptoms:
come on slowly
mainly affect your nose and throat
are fairly mild, so you can still get around and are usually well enough to go to work
What’s the difference between a cold and flu?
Complications of a common cold
Colds usually clear up without causing any further problems. But the infection can sometimes spread to your
chest
,
ears
or
sinuses
.
Source:
NHS 24