Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/diabetes/complications-of-type-1-diabetes/

---

Complications of type 1 diabetes
If you have
type 1 diabetes
, you might be more likely to have other health problems.
You can lower your chances of developing other health problems by:
managing your blood glucose well
eating a balanced diet
keeping active
as much as you can
not smoking or
stopping smoking
reducing your
cholesterol
reducing your
blood pressure
You can talk to your diabetes team about how to prevent complications. They’ll also help support you to keep well.
Hypo (hypoglycaemia or low blood glucose)
If you have diabetes, your blood glucose levels can become very low. This is known as a hypo.
In most cases a hypo happens when too much insulin is working. Getting the right balance of insulin to how much carbohydrate you take in can help you avoid hypos.
Read more about hypoglycaemia
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
DKA happens when there’s not enough insulin in your body. This means the body has to look for another source of energy. The body then breaks down fat and muscle to fuel itself. This leads to a harmful substances called ketones being released into your blood.
Read more about diabetic ketoacidosis
Retinopathy (diabetic eye problems)
Retinopathy is where the retina (the light-sensitive layer of tissue) at the back of the eye is damaged. Blood vessels in the retina can become blocked or leaky. It can also cause new, fragile, blood vessels to grow. If it isn’t treated, it can damage your vision.
Read more about diabetic retinopathy
Diabetic foot issues
Damage to the nerves of the foot can mean that small nicks and cuts aren’t noticed. These can cause foot ulcers. About 1 in 10 people with diabetes get a foot ulcer, which can cause serious infection.
If you develop nerve damage, you should check your feet every day and report any changes to your healthcare professional. You should also have a foot examination at least once a year.
Read more on diabetic foot issues
Heart disease and stroke
If you have diabetes, you’re up to 5 times more likely to develop
heart disease
or have a
stroke
.
If your blood glucose levels stay uncontrolled for a long time, it can increase the likelihood of developing
atherosclerosis.
This is a furring and narrowing of your blood vessels.
People with diabetes have more risk of furring up of large arteries that can lead to conditions like:
heart attack
stroke
reduced circulation to your feet (peripheral vascular disease)
The chances of these conditions can be reduced by:
improving blood sugar levels
stopping smoking
treating
high blood pressure
and
cholesterol
Your diabetes clinic will discuss how to reduce your risks with you.
Nerve damage
High blood glucose levels can damage the tiny blood vessels of your nerves. This can cause a tingling or burning pain that spreads from your toes (and rarely fingers) up through your limbs.
If the nerves in your digestive system are affected, you may experience:
feeling sick or being sick
diarrhoea
constipation
Kidney disease
If the small blood vessels in your kidney become blocked and leaky, your kidneys will work less efficiently.
Read more about kidney disease
Care standards for type 1 diabetes
Diabetes care includes:
an agreed care plan
information, care and support to help people keep their type 1 diabetes under control
access to services to identify and treat complications
effective care for all people with diabetes admitted to hospital for whatever reason
Agreed care plans
Your agreed care plan will help you manage your diabetes and lead a healthy lifestyle. Agreed care plans will include a contact for your diabetes team.
Information, care and support
If you have type 1 diabetes, you’ll be provided with information, care and support to:
control their blood glucose
maintain an acceptable blood pressure
minimise other risk factors for developing complications
Access to services to identify and treat possible complications
These services are things like screening for diabetic retinopathy and specialised footcare.
Help and support
Many people find it helpful to talk to others in a similar position. You may find support from a group for people with diabetes. Patient organisations have local groups where you can meet others who’ve been diagnosed with the condition.
Diabetes Scotland
(and the wider Diabetes UK website) have in information on diabetes and support for people with diabetes. If you want to talk to a trained counsellor you can:
phone Diabetes UK’s Helpline Scotland on 0345 123 2399
email
helpline.scotland@diabetes.org.uk
Further information on Helpline Scotland
Read more about type 1 diabetes
Source:
Scottish Government