Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/eyes/conjunctivitis/

---

Conjunctivitis
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Conjunctivitis (or red eye) is a common eye condition. It usually gets better in a few weeks without treatment.
Symptoms of conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis usually causes symptoms in both eyes like:
inflammation
redness
itching
a burning or gritty feeling
watering
pus that sticks to the eyelashes
Causes of conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis happens when the conjunctiva becomes inflamed. This is a thin layer of cells covering the front of your eyes.
The 3 most common causes of this inflammation are:
infection (infective conjunctivitis)
an allergic reaction (allergic conjunctivitis)
something irritating the conjunctiva, like a loose eyelash (irritant conjunctivitis)
Treating and preventing conjunctivitis
Do
boil water and let it cool down before you gently wipe your eyelashes to clean off crusts with a clean cotton wool pad (1 piece for each eye)
hold a cold towel over your eyes for a few minutes
wash your hands regularly – this is particularly important after touching your eyes
use lubricant eye drops – these are available at pharmacies or they may be prescribed for you
Don’t
do not rub your eyes
do not wear contact lenses until the symptoms have cleared up
don’t re-use old lenses after the infection has gone – they could cause re-infection
do not not share pillows or towels
You don’t need to take time off school or work if you have conjunctivitis unless you’re feeling very unwell.
Get advice from a pharmacist
Speak to a pharmacist for advice about conjunctivitis. They can suggest eyedrops or antihistamines to help with your symptoms.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Phone an optometrist urgently if you have:
pain in your eyes
sensitivity to light
changes in your vision, like wavy lines or flashing
very red eyes (1 eye or both eyes)
a baby less than 28 days old with red eyes
These can be signs of a more serious eye problem.
If your optometrist is closed phone 111.
Speak to an optometrist if:
your baby has red eyes – get an urgent appointment if your baby is less than 28 days old
you wear contact lenses and have conjunctivitis symptoms as well as spots on your eyelids – you might be allergic to the lenses
you have symptoms that haven’t cleared up after 2 weeks
Treatments for conjunctivitis
Treatment for conjunctivitis will depend on what’s causing it.
You may be prescribed antibiotics to treat a bacterial infection. But these won’t work if the symptoms are caused by a virus or an allergy.
Allergic conjunctivitis can usually be treated with antihistamines. If possible, you should also try to avoid the substance that triggered the allergy.
Irritant conjunctivitis will ease when whatever is causing the symptoms is removed.
Some sexually transmitted infections (STIs) can cause conjunctivitis. This type takes longer to get better.
Eye problems self-help guide
Complete our self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Source:
Scottish Government