Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/coronavirus-covid-19/coronavirus-covid-19/

---

Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Coronavirus, and other respiratory infections like flu, can spread easily and cause serious illness in some people.
Symptoms of coronavirus
Symptoms of coronavirus include:
a new continuous
cough
sneezing
a blocked or runny nose
a
sore throat
a
headache
muscle aches
shortness of breath
, tight chest or wheezing
a high temperature (
fever
) – this is usually about 38°C or higher (100.4°F)
feeling generally unwell
feeling tired or have a lack of energy
Less common symptoms include:
diarrhoea
loss of appetite
feeling sick or vomiting
What to do if you have symptoms
If you have symptoms of coronavirus, you should:
stay away from people at increased risk of becoming more unwell from respiratory infections, if possible
not visit hospitals or care homes
You may still have a
cough
or feel tired after your other symptoms have gone. This doesn’t mean that you’re still infectious to others.
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
You or your child:
have severe or sudden
chest pain
that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
are coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
collapse, faint, or have a
seizure
or fit for the first time
feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
have lips or skin that are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of the hands
have blotchy or mottled skin
have a rash that does not fade when you roll a glass over it – use the glass test from
meningitis now
Speak to your GP practice if you:
have symptoms that are not improving or you’re concerned about your symptoms
are worried about your child
have had a high temperature for more than 3 days
have a temperature below 36°C
have breathlessness which is not improving
have had a
cough
for more than 3 weeks
have symptoms that are not improving or they’re affecting your daily life
have a long-term medical condition – for example,
diabetes
, or a heart, lung or kidney condition
have a weakened immune system – for example, because you’re having
chemotherapy
Treatment for coronavirus
Most people no longer need to take a coronavirus test. You can still access testing if you have a health condition which means
you’re eligible for coronavirus treatments
.
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Most
acute respiratory infections
like coronavirus pass within 3 weeks. There are some things you can do to help relieve your symptoms until the infection clears up.
Do
rest
drink plenty of fluids
eat healthily
take over-the-counter pain relief, such as
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
, to help with high temperature and aches
use
decongestant
sprays or tablets to relieve a blocked nose
use extra pillows to raise your head while sleeping to make breathing easier and clear your chest of mucus
try remedies such as gargling salt water and sucking on menthol sweets
Don’t
do not smoke – this can make your symptoms worse
do not take paracetamol and flu remedies that contain paracetamol at the same time
do not give
aspirin
to children under 16
Antibiotics will not relieve your symptoms or speed up your recovery.
It’s important to get help if you’re at increased risk of becoming more unwell from coronavirus. This includes if you’re pregnant, aged 60 or over, or have a weakened immune system.
Coronavirus self-help guide
Advice for people who may have coronavirus symptoms.
Complete our self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
How to reduce the spread of infection if you have symptoms
There are things you can do to reduce the spread of coronavirus infection.
Do
cover your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze
wash your hands regularly with soap and water for 20 seconds
use hand sanitiser after coughing, sneezing, blowing your nose, and before you eat or handle food
regularly clean surfaces that you use often, like door handles and remote controls, and shared areas such as kitchens and bathrooms
ventilate rooms you have been in by opening windows
stay at home until you no longer have a fever (if you had one) and don’t need medicine to lower your fever
if you have been asked to attend a medical or dental appointment in person, tell them about your symptoms before attending
let people you’ve recently been in contact with know that you’re feeling unwell, so they can watch for symptoms, especially if they’re at higher risk of getting ill from a respiratory infection
tell anyone who needs to come into your home that you have respiratory symptoms
wear a face mask or face covering if you need to leave your home whilst unwell
try to avoid busy or crowded spaces with poor ventilation
Don’t
do not have close contact with anyone who is at increased risk of becoming more unwell from coronavirus, especially individuals with a weakened immune system, if you can
Children and young people aged 18 and under
Respiratory infections are common in children and young people, especially during the winter months. Symptoms can be caused by respiratory infections, including the common cold and coronavirus.
Children and young people with mild symptoms can continue to attend their education setting. Mild symptoms include a runny nose, sore throat, or slight cough.
If a child or young person aged 18 or under tests positive or has respiratory symptoms, they should stay at home. When they no longer have a fever (if they had one), and don’t need medicine to control the fever, they can return to normal activities. There’s no specific time limit they need to avoid contact with others. You can use 48 hours as a rough guide.
Children and young people tend to be infectious for less time than adults.
For most children and young people, these illnesses will not be serious. They’ll soon recover following rest and plenty of fluids.
Very few children and young people with respiratory infections become seriously unwell.
Children and young people should continue to attend their education setting, even if the person they live with has a positive test result.
How to prevent coronavirus
Vaccination is one of the best ways to protect yourself from developing serious illness. Vaccines available on the NHS include:
flu vaccine
coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccine
RSV vaccine
for adults aged 75 to 79
RSV vaccine
during pregnancy
child flu vaccine
Further information about NHS vaccinations
Visiting care homes
People living in care homes can still have visitors during an outbreak, but certain things will work differently.
Get advice about visiting care homes when there’s an outbreak
Financial Support
The Self-Isolation Support Grant closed on 5 January 2023. Visit the
Scottish Government’s Cost of Living support
to find out about other financial help available.
Source:
Public Health Scotland