Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/cardiovascular-disease/heart-disease/coronary-heart-disease/

---

Coronary heart disease
Phone 999 if:
You or someone else has symptoms like:
central chest pain or discomfort in the chest that doesn’t go away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
pain that radiates down the left arm, or both arms, or to the neck, jaw, back or stomach
unconsciousness
seizures or fitting
difficulty breathing (snoring or rasping)
rapid heart beat
low or undetectable heart beat
chest pain and breathlessness, nausea, sweating or coughing up blood
What is coronary heart disease?
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a term used to describe what happens when the blood flow to the heart is interrupted or reduced. It is also known as ischaemic heart disease.
Often, the reduction or blockage in blood flow is caused by atherosclerosis. This is when a fatty material called atheroma builds up inside the coronary arteries. This can narrow the coronary arteries, reducing the blood flow.
If a piece of atheroma breaks off, this can cause a blockage and cut off blood supply to the heart. This is known as a heart attack.
Further information is available about the diagnosis, treatment and management of:
a heart attack
angina
Symptoms of coronary heart disease
The main symptoms of coronary heart disease are:
chest pain (
angina
)
shortness of breath
pain throughout the body
feeling faint
feeling sick (nausea)
Phone 999 if:
you think you or someone else is having a
heart attack
Heart failure and coronary heart disease
Heart failure
can sometimes occur in people with CHD. This is when the heart becomes too weak to pump blood around the body. This can cause fluid to build up in the lungs, making it increasingly difficult to breathe.
Chest pains without coronary disease
Microvascular angina is a problem with tiny blood vessels that supply blood to your heart. It may be caused when these tiny blood vessels:
can’t open up properly to let your blood flow
severely narrow, blocking blood flow to the heart
The main symptom of microvascular angina is chest pain. You may feel it at any time.
Lifestyle changes can often improve symptoms.
Read further information about microvascular angina
Further information is available on the impact of heart disease on women
Diagnosing coronary heart disease
Many different tests may be used to diagnose coronary heart disease, including:
CT coronary angiography (CTCA)
coronary angiography
electrocardiogram (ECG)
thallium scan (myocardial perfusion scintigraphy)
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Risk factors for coronary heart disease
There are various risk factors for heart disease, some of which you have control over and others that you don’t.
Uncontrollable risk factors
Uncontrollable risk factors for heart disease include:
age
family history of heart disease or stroke
ethnicity
being post-menopausal
Lifestyle risk factors
Your risk can also be increased by certain lifestyle factors. These are sometimes called controllable risk factors. For example, your diet, level of physical activity and smoking habits.
You can make lifestyle changes to reduce your risk of heart disease, including:
eating a balanced diet
weight management
keeping active and exercising regularly
stopping smoking
Health conditions
If you’ve been diagnosed with some other health conditions, you might also be at increased risk of heart disease. These conditions include:
hypertension (high blood pressure)
high cholesterol
type 2 diabetes
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
inflammatory diseases, including
rheumatoid arthritis
Support groups
You might find support groups useful if you:
have a heart condition
have had a heart condition in the past
are caring for someone with a heart condition
Your GP or specialist should be able to provide you with details about your nearest support group. You can also search
Scotland’s Services Directory.
Information and support for people living with a heart condition is also provided by:
The British Heart Foundation
Chest, Heart & Stroke Scotland
Source:
Scottish Government