Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/croup/

---

Croup
Croup is a childhood condition that affects the windpipe (trachea), the airways to the lungs (the bronchi) and the voice box (larynx).
Croup usually affects young children aged between 6 months and 3 years, though they could be younger or older. Most cases happen in 1 year olds. It’s more common during the late autumn and early winter months. It tends to affect more boys than girls. A child can have croup more than once.
Croup in adults is rare.
Symptoms of croup
Children with croup have a barking cough that sounds like a seal. They’ll make a harsh sound, known as stridor, when they breathe in. Stridor is often most noticeable when the child cries or coughs. They may also have a hoarse voice and find it difficult to breathe because their airway is blocked.
Some children have
cold-like symptoms
for a few days before developing croup symptoms. Croup symptoms usually only last for a few days and are often worse at night. But they can occasionally last up to 2 weeks.
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
Your child:
has lips or skin that are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of their hands
has severe difficulty breathing – they may make grunting noises or suck their stomach in under their ribcage
is breathing fast or stops or pauses
is pulling in at their throat area (tracheal tug) or their windpipe is more prominent
is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do – they may find it difficult to focus on you or are more difficult to wake up than usual
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 38°C (101°F) or above and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 36°C (97°F) or less and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
Contact your GP practice urgently if:
Your child:
is more short of breath than usual
has pain when breathing in or coughing
is feeling confused, dizzy or lightheaded
feels sick or is being sick – for example, they can’t keep food or fluids down
is coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
has had a dry nappy for 12 hours or more, or is showing other signs of
dehydration
has a very high or low temperature – for example, they feel either hot or cold to touch or are shivering
has a distinctive barking cough
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Diagnosing croup
Croup can usually be diagnosed by a GP. They’ll check your child’s symptoms, particularly the sound of their cough. If you can, record the noise your child is making on your phone so your GP can hear it. This can be helpful if your child only coughs at night.
Your GP may also:
check your child’s temperature
ask whether your child has recently had a cold or viral infection
do a pulse oximetry test to check your child’s oxygen levels (this involves clipping a sensor onto your child’s earlobe or finger – it does not hurt)
rule out other conditions with more tests
Your GP will decide whether your child needs to go to hospital or whether their croup is safe to treat at home.
You should not try to check your child’s throat yourself. It could trigger a spasm (sudden narrowing) of the airway. This could make breathing even more difficult.
Treatment for croup
Most cases of croup are mild and can be treated at home.
Sitting your child upright and comforting them if they are distressed is important. This is because crying may make symptoms worse. Your child should also drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration.
Usually, your child will be prescribed medication to help reduce the swelling in their throat. The medication is a single dose of an oral
corticosteroid
called dexamethasone or prednisolone. Side effects of these medications can include restlessness, vomiting, upset stomach and headache.
Steam treatment is not recommended.
You should seek urgent medical advice if you notice your child’s symptoms getting worse.
Pain relief for children
Children’s
paracetamol
can ease pain and may help lower your child’s temperature if they have a fever.
Children under 16 years of age should not be given aspirin.
Speak to your pharmacist or GP if you are unsure about what type of pain relief is right for your child.
Do not use cough medicines or decongestants. These do not help ease the symptoms of croup. These treatments often have drowsy side effects, which can be dangerous when a child has breathing difficulties.
Hospital treatment
In severe cases of croup, treatment in hospital may be needed. This might include your child being given adrenaline or oxygen.
What causes croup?
Commonly, croup is caused by a virus. Several viruses can cause croup but in most cases it is the parainfluenza virus.
The virus can be passed on by close contact with infected people, as well as contaminated objects and surfaces. It’s often spread by breathing in droplets from infected coughs or sneezes.
Other viruses can also cause croup. These include:
influenza A and B (
flu viruses
)
the
measles
virus, in children who have not been
immunised against measles
the rhinovirus (
common cold virus
)
enteroviruses
the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), which can cause severe breathing problems and
pneumonia
in babies
Less common causes of croup include:
breathing in a small object such as a peanut or a pen cap (inhaled foreign body)
inflammation of the epiglottis (the flap at the base of the tongue that keeps food from going into the windpipe)
a severe allergic reaction (
anaphylaxis
), for example to certain foods
breathing in irritants such as chemicals
acid leaking back out of the stomach and into the throat (
acid reflux
)
Source:
Scottish Government