Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/injuries/skin-injuries/cuts-and-grazes/

---

Cuts and grazes
Most cuts and grazes are minor and can be easily treated at home. They will usually start to heal within a few days.
You may need treatment by a healthcare professional if the cut is serious or there’s a risk of infection.
How to treat cuts and grazes yourself
If you have a cut or graze, you should:
stop the bleeding
clean the wound well
cover the wound with a plaster or dressing
If the wound is painful for the first few days, you can take pain relief like
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen.
How to stop bleeding
If you have an injury that’s bleeding, you should:
Clean the wound.
Apply pressure to the area using a clean towel or cloth for 10 minutes.
Press firmly to push the edges of the wound together.
If there’s something stuck in the wound, do not try to take it out. Press down on the object.
If the cut is to your hand or arm, raise it above your head. This will help to reduce the flow of blood.
If the injury is on your lower limb, lie down and raise it above the level of your heart.
When the bleeding has stopped, wrap a new bandage firmly over the first cloth or bandage.
If the wound keeps bleeding, leave the first bandage in place and add another one. Keep pressing firmly on the wound for another 10 minutes.
How to clean and dress a cut or graze
If the bleeding has stopped, you can clean a small wound and then put a plaster or dressing over it.
To clean a cut or graze:
Wash and dry your hands thoroughly.
Put on disposable gloves, if you have some.
Rinse the wound with clean water, or by using sterile wipes.
Clean the skin around the wound using soap and water or antiseptic. Try not to get antiseptic into the wound.
Pat the area dry with a clean towel.
Put on a sterile adhesive dressing, like a plaster.
Change dressings regularly to keep them clean.
You can remove the dressing after a few days once the wound has closed itself.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have a cut and can’t stop the bleeding
the blood comes out in spurts and is bright red and hard to control
you lose feeling near the wound or have trouble moving it
you have a bad cut on your face or the palm of your hand
the wound is very large or deep
there’s something stuck in the cut like a shard of glass – do not try to take it out yourself
Contact your GP practice immediately if:
a wound has soil, pus or bodily fluids in it, or it’s still dirty after cleaning it
you were bitten by a person or an animal
a cut is swollen, red and getting more painful or pus is coming out of it
a cut is larger than around 5cm (2 inches)
you’ve cut yourself and also feel generally unwell or have a high temperature
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111
.
Treatments for cuts and grazes
How a cut or graze is treated will depend on how bad it is and if there’s a risk of it becoming infected.
The cut will be cleaned and closed with either stitches, strips or special glue before a dressing is put over it.
The wound may not be closed straight away if it’s infected or there’s a risk it may get infected.
You may also need to have an injection to prevent tetanus or be given antibiotics if the cut could be infected.
Source:
NHS 24