Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/kidneys-bladder-and-prostate/cystitis/

---

Cystitis
Cystitis is a type of
urinary tract infection (UTI)
that affects the bladder. It’s common, particularly in women. Cystitis often gets better by itself but may sometimes be treated with
antibiotics
.
If you experience frequent episodes of cystitis, you may need regular or long-term treatment.
There’s also a chance that cystitis could lead to a more serious
ki
dney infection
. It’s important to seek professional advice if your symptoms don’t improve.
Symptoms of cystitis
Cystitis can cause problems with peeing and make you feel unwell.
Symptoms of cystitis in adults
Symptoms of cystitis in adults include:
pain, burning or stinging when you pee
needing to pee more often and urgently than normal
feeling like you need to pee again soon after going to the toilet
pee that’s dark, cloudy or strong-smelling
pain low down in your tummy
feeling generally unwell, achy, sick and tired
blood in your urine
In adults, cystitis doesn’t usually cause a high temperature (fever). If you have a temperature of 38C (100.4F) or above and pain in your lower back or sides, it may be a sign of a
kidney infection
.
Symptoms of cystitis in children
Symptoms of cystitis in children include:
a high
temperature (fever)
of 38C (100.4F) or above
weakness and tiredness
irritability
reduced appetite
vomiting
Children with cystitis can sometimes also have symptoms usually found in adults. This can include things like pain when peeing, peeing more often than normal, and pain in their tummy.
When to get medical advice
Contact your GP practice urgently if you or your child:
have a very high or low temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or are shivering
have pain in the lower tummy or in your back under the ribs
are feeling confused, dizzy or lightheaded
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
have not had to pee all day or are showing other signs of
dehydration
have blood in your pee
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Speak to your GP practice if you or your child:
have symptoms of cystitis for the first time
have symptoms of cystitis that have not improved within a few days
have symptoms that have not gone away after treatment with antibiotics
have severe symptoms of cystitis, such as severe pain in your lower tummy
get cystitis frequently
have symptoms of cystitis and you’re pregnant
are male and have symptoms of cystitis
Treatment for cystitis
Mild cystitis will usually clear up on its own within a few days, although sometimes you may need to take antibiotics.
Women who have had cystitis before don’t necessarily need to see their GP if the condition returns. Mild cases often get better without
antibiotics
. You can try the self-help measures or ask your pharmacist for advice.
Things you can try yourself
If you’ve had cystitis before and don’t feel you need to see your GP, there are some things you can do to help relieve your symptoms until the condition clears up.
It may help to:
take over-the-counter painkillers, like
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
– always read the medicine information leaflet beforehand to check whether you can take it, and check with your pharmacist if you’re not sure
drink plenty of water
use a hot water bottle – holding a hot water bottle on your tummy or between your thighs may reduce any discomfort
avoid having sex
avoid drinks that may irritate your bladder, like fruit juices, coffee and alcohol
pee frequently
Some people find that drinking cranberry juice or using products that reduce the acidity of their pee (such as sodium bicarbonate or potassium citrate) reduces their symptoms. However, there’s no evidence that they help symptoms or treat cystitis.
Treatment from a pharmacist
Speak to your local pharmacist about cystitis treatments. Your pharmacist can:
offer advice on how to treat your symptoms
suggest which medication to take
advise you on whether you need to see a GP about your symptoms
Find your local pharmacist
What to do if cystitis keeps coming back
If you keep getting cystitis (known as recurrent cystitis) your doctor may prescribe stand-by antibiotics or continuous antibiotics.
A stand-by antibiotic is a prescription you can take to a pharmacy the next time you have symptoms of cystitis, without needing to visit your GP first.
Continuous antibiotics are taken for several months to prevent further episodes of cystitis. These may be prescribed if cystitis:
usually occurs after having sex – you may be given a prescription for antibiotics to take within 2 hours of having sex
is not related to having sex – you may be given a low-dose antibiotic to take for a trial period of 6 months
What causes cystitis?
Cystitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection. Sometimes it’s caused by the bladder being irritated or damaged.
Women have a shorter urethra than men. This means bacteria are more likely to reach the bladder and cause an infection.
Things that can cause bacteria to reach the bladder include:
having sex
wiping your bottom after going to the toilet – particularly if you wipe from back to front
inserting a tampon or
urinary catheter
(a thin tube inserted into the urethra to drain the bladder)
using a
diaphragm
for contraception
using spermicide with
contraception
a blockage in the urinary tract, such as
kidney stones
pregnancy
conditions that make it difficult to empty the bladder fully, such as an
enlarged prostate
in men
having been through
menopause
diabetes
having a weakened immune system
How to prevent cystitis
If you get cystitis often, there are some things you can try to prevent it from coming back.
Do
wipe from front to back after going to the toilet
empty your bladder as soon as possible after sex
stay well hydrated – drinking plenty of fluids may help to stop bacteria multiplying in your bladder
have a shower rather than a bath – this avoids exposing your genitals to the chemicals in your cleaning products for too long
go to the toilet as soon as you need to pee and always empty your bladder fully
wear underwear made from cotton, rather than synthetic material like nylon
keep the genital area clean and dry
change soiled nappies or incontinence pads frequently
Don’t
do not use perfumed bubble bath, soap or talcum powder around your genitals
do not use spermicide with a diaphragm or condoms – try using lubricant (lube) that does not contain spermicide or a different method of contraception
do not hold your pee in if you have to go to the toilet
do not not wear tight jeans and trousers
do not drink lots of alcohol or coffee as they may irritate your bladder
Source:
NHS 24