Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/neck-and-back-problems-and-conditions/degenerative-cervical-myelopathy/

---

Degenerative cervical myelopathy
This information may be useful for those who have been medically diagnosed with degenerative cervical myelopathy. People who are experiencing new or ongoing symptoms should visit their healthcare professional for assessment, diagnosis or treatment.
Read about managing a neck problem
What is degenerative cervical myelopathy
Degenerative cervical myelopathy is a condition that is caused by age related changes to the bones, ligaments and discs of the neck. This can sometimes cause pressure on the spinal cord which can affect function of the nerves.
Symptoms of degenerative cervical myelopathy
It’s common to experience one or multiple symptoms.
The most common symptoms include:
pain or stiffness in the neck
tingling or numbness in the arms or legs (often starting in fingertips or toes) or less commonly in the body
change or loss in the manual coordination or dexterity in the hands (e.g. fastening buttons or tying shoelaces)
pain, weakness or heaviness in the arms or legs
imbalance or feeling unsteady which may lead to falls
difficulty walking
change of bladder or bowel function, such as increased urgency or incontinence
When to get professional help
Many people have a combination of neck pain, arm pain, numbness and weakness. These symptoms can be distressing, but don’t necessarily require urgent medical attention.
Sometimes symptoms can progress suddenly, early recognition and treatment can prevent further deterioration.
If you feel that your symptoms are gradually worsening over time you should contact your healthcare professional to discuss this.
Speak to your GP urgently if:
You have experienced a new onset or significant worsening of the following symptoms:
changes to bladder and bowel function like urgency, frequency, difficulty passing urine, leaking, incontinence
changes to sensation around the bottom and or genitals or sexual dysfunction like recent inability to achieve orgasm or erection
reduced balance or difficulty walking
pain, weakness, heaviness or changing sensation in the arms or legs
clumsy hands e.g. dropping things, struggling with handwriting, buttons or zips
if your neck pain is associated with a severe headache
Phone 111 if your GP practice is closed.
Contact your GP if you have neck pain:
and you also feel generally unwell
that starts when your are ill with other problems like rheumatoid arthritis and cancer
If you feel that your symptoms are gradually worsening over time you should contact your healthcare professional to discuss this.
Diagnosing degenerative cervical myelopathy
In order for degenerative cervical myelopathy to be diagnosed you’ll need an assessment from a healthcare professional.
They’ll ask you questions about your symptoms and then carry out a physical examination. This may include checking your strength, movement and nerve function.
Depending on the examination you may then be offered an
MRI scan
.
You may sometimes need to have a further examination to rule out other causes of these symptoms.
Causes of degenerative cervical myelopathy
Degenerative cervical mylopathy is a condition that causes pressure on the spinal cord which can affect function of the nerves. There are a number of reasons this pressure can happen including:
age related narrowing
significant changes to the bones, ligaments or discs in the neck
As we get older, aging in the spine can cause narrowing and a reduction of space for the spinal nerves leading to compression.
Treatment of degenerative cervical myelopathy
The treatments for degenerative cervical myelopathy depend on your assessment and investigation by your healthcare professional.
Some peoples symptoms are able to be managed with self-management and modifications to their activities.
Your healthcare professional may discuss whether surgery is an option for you.
Work
A neck problem can sometimes mean you need to take some time off work to help recovery. How long you’re off will depend on the nature of your condition and your role at work.
This is a long term condition and it’s a good idea to discuss with your employer or occupational health what support you need to return to or remain at work.
Further support
When dealing with any health condition it’s important to also look after
your mental wellbeing
as this can impact your recovery.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group