Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/dementia

---

Dementia
Dementia
Information, support and advice on dementia
About dementia
Dementia is an umbrella term for a range of conditions associated with damage to the brain or brain cells (neuron). This means the brain cannot work as well as it should.
Dementia can affect your ability to remember, think and speak. It also affects how you feel and behave.
Find out more about dementia
Types of dementia
There are many types of dementia. These are some of the most common.
Alzheimer’s disease
Find information on Alzheimer’s disease which is a common type of dementia.
Dementia with Lewy bodies
Find information on dementia with Lewy bodies which is a common type of dementia.
Vascular dementia
Find information on vascular dementia which is a common type of dementia.
Worried about memory loss?
As you get older, you may find that memory loss becomes a problem. It’s normal for your memory to be affected by things like stress or tiredness.
But, dementia is not a normal part of the ageing process.
Get advice if you’re worried about dementia
Speak to your GP practice if:
Memory loss:
affects your daily life
is worrying you or someone you know
Living with dementia
People can, and do, live a good life with dementia for years. Because dementia is progressive and affects different people in different ways, it’s important to continue to do what matters to you.
Advice if you’ve just had a dementia diagnosis
Get advice and information if you’ve just had a dementia diagnosis.
Living well with dementia
Information and advice on living with dementia.
Caring for someone with dementia
Dementia can affect all aspects of a person’s life, as well as those around them. But, it’s important to remember that you’re not alone. There are many places to get advice and support.
Daily living and dementia
Advice on daily living and dementia if you’re living with or caring for someone with dementia.
Personal care in dementia
Advice on personal care in dementia if you’re caring for someone with dementia.
Support if you’re caring for someone with dementia
Get information and advice if you’re caring for someone with dementia.
Support with dementia
There are many organisations that can help if you or someone else is affected by dementia. This includes:
Alzheimer Scotland
Age Scotland
Alzheimer’s Research UK
Care Information Scotland
Carers Trust
You can get advice on dementia support groups through:
Meeting Centres
The Dementia Friendly Communities Network
Age Scotland
Alzheimer Scotland
Carers Scotland forum
Mental health support
Being diagnosed with dementia can be challenging for your mental health and wellbeing, and can impact those close to you.
You can phone the
Alzheimer Scotland dementia helpline
for support on
0808 808 3000
. This helpline is free and is open 24 hours a day.
NHS inform has general advice on managing your
mental health
and
wellbeing
. This includes:
breathing and relaxation exercises
mindfulness for mental wellbeing
getting help with your mental health
You can also get support through
mental health services at NHS 24
and
Mind to Mind
.
Give feedback about this page
Let us know what you liked, what you didn’t or what you think is missing by emailing
nhs.inform@nhs24.scot.nhs.uk
Please don’t include personal information like your name, location or any personal health conditions.
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852