Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/depression/

---

Depression
Depression is a mental health condition that has a range of symptoms. These can affect how you think and feel. For example, you may feel low or lose enjoyment or interest in things.
Symptoms of depression can range from mild to severe. How much depression impacts your day-to-day life will depend on how severe it is.
It’s not always possible to tell that you have symptoms of depression right away. It can start and progress gradually.
A lot of people don’t realise they’re ill and try to carry on and cope with their symptoms. Sometimes it takes a friend or family member to notice that there’s a problem.
Symptoms of depression
Depression has a range of different symptoms and it can affect everybody differently.
How you may feel
Depression may make you feel:
continuous sadness or low mood
irritable
guilty
hopeless
tired or low in energy
emotional or tearful
anxious
angry or frustrated about small things
negative about yourself (low self-esteem)
low confidence in yourself
intolerant of other people
How you may act
Depression may mean you:
find it hard to make decisions
don’t enjoy activities that usually make you happy
think about
self-harm
or
suicidal thoughts
speak or move slower than usual
lose interest in sex
have difficulty concentrating
have difficulty remembering things
use alcohol, tobacco or drugs more than usual
have
problems sleeping
, or sleep too much
lose or gain appetite
lose or gain weight
have aches and pains that can’t be explained
Day-to-day effects of depression
Depression can cause symptoms that affect your day-to-day life. It can cause difficulties at home or with your family and can affect your ability to complete tasks at work.
It may also mean you avoid social activities, don’t do your usual hobbies or avoid people close to you.
Speak to your GP practice if:
depression is affecting your daily life
you’re not looking after yourself
you’re finding it hard to manage any responsibilities you have
Types of depression
There are many different types of depression, these can affect people at different stages of their lives, during different life events and can be:
a single event
recurring episodes
continuous, known as chronic depression
It’s also important to recognise that depression is more likely at certain times, such as
before a menstrual period
,
before or after pregnancy
or at particular times of year like
seasonal affective disorder (SAD)
.
Depression can also be a feature of other mental health conditions,such as
bipolar disorder.
Psychotic depression
Some people who have severe
depression
will also experience symptoms of
psychosis
. This is called psychotic depression.
Psychotic depression can cause symptoms like:
hallucinations – see or hear things that aren’t there
delusions – believe things that aren’t true
psychomotor agitation – can’t sit still and fidget all the time
psychomotor retardation – can slow your thoughts and movements
People who have psychotic depression are at a higher risk of thinking about suicide.
Get help with suicidal thoughts
Help for psychotic depression
People with psychosis don’t often know they’re acting and thinking strangely. This means someone else may have to get them help.
If someone is experiencing psychosis and they’ve been diagnosed with a mental health condition before, speak to their:
community mental health team
social worker
If someone has never had a mental health condition before and is experiencing psychotic depression, you should:
contact their GP practice, or
take them to A&E
Diagnosing depression
It’s important to speak to your GP practice if you think you may be depressed. They’ll ask questions about your health and how you’re feeling.
It’s important to be as open as possible when you speak to your GP. This will help them find out if you have depression and how severe it is.
Treatment for depression
There are different treatments for depression. The best one for you will depend on how severe your symptoms are. Sometimes you may need to try different treatments to find one that works for you.
Talking therapies
There are many talking therapies for depression. This includes:
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
computerised CBT (CCBT)
interpersonal therapy (IPT)
psychodynamic psychotherapy
counselling
Further information on counselling and therapies
Medication
Your GP may suggest taking medication like
antidepressants
to treat your depression. This is more likely if your depression is moderate or severe.
You may need to try different antidepressants to find one that works for you. Some different types of antidepressant include:
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
noradrenaline and specific serotonergic antidepressants (NASSAs)
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
In certain circumstances, you may be prescribed lithium to treat depression. For example, if you’ve tried different antidepressants and your symptoms haven’t improved.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
ECT involves sending an electrical current through your brain. You’ll be given anaesthetic and medication to relax your muscles before the treatment.
ECT will only be offered in certain circumstances. For example, if you have severe depression and other treatments haven’t worked.
Further information on ECT
St John’s Wort
St John’s Wort is a herbal treatment that you can buy from pharmacies and health food shops. There’s some evidence that it can help less severe depression but doctors don’t recommend it.
St John’s Wort isn’t suitable if you’re taking certain medications, or are pregnant or breastfeeding. It can also interact with the
contraceptive pill
.
What causes depression?
There isn’t one single cause of depression. It can have a range of triggers and there are many reasons people develop the condition. Sometimes people develop depression without an obvious cause.
Life events
Some people are affected by depression after a stressful life event. For example:
bereavement
divorce or the end of a relationship
relationship problems
illness or a physical health problem
money worries
job loss
Other causes of depression
Other things that can increase your risk of depression include:
drug use
alcohol
family history of depression
your way of thinking – for example, if you think about a negative event over and over
having a baby – many parents experience
postnatal depression
after having a baby
negative childhood experiences – like neglect or abuse
having another mental health problem – like
anxiety
,
eating problems
or
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Living with depression
Depression can be difficult to deal with but there are ways you can look after yourself. For example, you should talk to people you trust about your depression.
You could also try something creative like art, poetry or writing a journal. This can help you to express how you’re feeling.
Further information on looking after your mental wellbeing
Depression self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for depression that uses Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT).
Depression self-help guide
Supporting someone who has depression
If you you’re worried about someone close to you, try to:
get professional help for them
let them know they’re not alone and that you care about them
offer support in finding solutions to their problems
If you’re close to someone with depression, their condition can also affect you. Your relationship, and family life in general, can be strained. You might not know what to do or how to help.
Talking about the situation can help. Finding a support group, or talking to other people in a similar situation, can make it easier to cope.
If the condition affects your relationship, you could contact a relationship counsellor. They can talk things through with both of you.
Depression and suicide
If you have suicidal thoughts or think about killing yourself, help and support is available.
Phone Samaritans on 116 123 for support. They are open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. You can also visit the
Samaritans
website.
You can also speak to your GP, but you should do this as soon as possible.
Get help with suicidal thoughts
Source:
NHS 24