Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/diabetes/diabetic-ketoacidosis-dka/

---

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a life-threatening condition that can affect people with diabetes.
Symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
The symptoms of DKA include:
the smell of ketones on breath (this may smell like pear drops or nail polish remover)
deep breathing
abdominal (stomach) pain
nausea and vomiting
These can happen along with symptoms of high blood sugar which include:
peeing often
thirst
tiredness and lack of energy
blurry vision
The symptoms usually develop over 24 hours but they can develop more quickly, especially in children and during pregnancy.
DKA is most likely to affect people with
type 1 diabetes
. It most often happens when another illness means you are unable to eat or drink properly, or take your insulin. It can occasionally happen in people with
type 2 diabetes
who need insulin.
DKA can also happen when people first develop type 1 diabetes and haven’t been diagnosed yet. This is more likely in children.
If untreated, DKA can lead to unconsciousness.
Phone 999 if:
someone has become unconscious
Checking your blood sugars and ketones
If you have any of the symptoms of DKA you should check your blood sugar levels immediately. Your care team may have given you instructions on how to measure and interpret your ketones.
As a guide for ketones in your blood:
under 0.6mmol/L is normal
0.6 to 1.5mmol/L is slightly high – test again in 2 hours
1.6 to 3mmol/L means you’re at risk of DKA and should speak to your diabetes care team for advice
over 3mmol/L is high and means you may have DKA and should call 999 or go to A&E
If you use strips to test for ketones in your pee, over 2+ is high. This means you may have DKA and should call 999 or go to A&E.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if you:
have a high level of ketones – over 3mmol/L in your blood, or over 2+ in your pee
do not know your ketone levels but have symptoms of DKA
have symptoms of DKA and have not been diagnosed with diabetes
Don’t drive yourself to A&E. If you can’t get someone to drive you to A&E call 999.
Phone your care team or 111 if:
You have diabetes and your:
blood glucose is high and your insulin treatment is not working to reduce it, even if your ketones are normal
ketones are slightly high (0.6 to 1.5mmol/L) and you feel unwell
ketones are 1.6 to 3mmol/L, even if you do not feel unwell
What causes diabetic ketoacidosis?
DKA happens when there’s not enough insulin in your body. This means the body cannot use carbohydrate for energy. The body then breaks down fat and muscle to fuel itself. This leads to harmful substances called ketones to be released and build up in your blood.
DKA can happen in people with diabetes, particularly if you:
are unwell
have had surgery
have not taken enough insulin
Treatment for diabetic ketoacidosis
If you have DKA, you may need to be treated in hospital. You may be given:
insulin
fluids
nutrients
These will be given to you through a drip into your vein.
You’ll also be monitored for complications. DKA can sometimes affect your brain, heart or lungs.
You’ll be able to go home once your ketones are at a safe level and:
you can eat and drink normally
you’re able to take insulin
Your healthcare team will talk to you about what caused DKA. They’ll give you advice on how to reduce the risk of it happening again.
How to prevent diabetic ketoacidosis
People with Type 1 diabetes can help to prevent DKA by monitoring their blood sugar levels regularly.
You should follow the treatment plan you’ve agreed with your care team or GP. If you’re confident in adjusting your insulin doses then you should do so. If not contact your healthcare team.
Your blood sugar levels could be higher than normal when you’re unwell. This means you’ll be more at risk of DKA. Work with your healthcare team to develop steps on what to do when you’re ill.
Further information and advice on diabetic ketoacidosis
If advised by your care team, you can get a kit to test for ketones free from the NHS. You can also buy If advised by your care team, you can get a kit to test for ketones free from the NHS. You can also buy one from a pharmacy.
You can use:
a ketone meter to test your blood
some types of blood glucose monitor that also test for ketones
strips to test your pee
If you’re unwell you’ll still need insulin and food. If you’re unable to have either you should contact your healthcare professional.
Further resources
Diabetes UK has more information on DKA
MyDiabetesMyWay have information and resources on detecting and treating DKA
Source:
Scottish Government