Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/diabetes/diabetic-foot-issues/

---

Diabetic foot issues
Having diabetes means you have a higher risk of developing issues with your feet. This is because having higher blood glucose levels for a long time can cause nerve damage (also called neuropathy) in your feet.
Blood flow (circulation) to your feet can also be affected by:
smoking
high blood pressure
high cholesterol
a history of
heart disease
or
stroke
Phone 999 or go to Accident and Emergency if:
your foot is changing colour (going very pale or blue), especially with new numbness or pain in the foot
What causes diabetic foot issues?
Nerve damage is the most common problem that can occur in people with diabetes. It usually takes one of two forms.
Painful nerve damage
Nerve damage causes pain in the foot. It’s often described as burning, pins and needles, achy, or like toothache in the foot.
This might feel worse when in bed at night or when someone or something touches your feet but can happen at any time.
Painless nerve damage
Painless nerve damage is normally a loss of sensation. You may not notice any problems with your foot. You might only notice when you can’t feel it being touched during an examination.
If this nerve damage is found it increases your risk of future foot problems. Your health care team will help you understand your personal foot risk. You may need regular contact with a health care professional. They will explain what changes you should be looking for.
When should I contact a healthcare professional?
Phone your podiatrist or GP urgently if you have:
a hot, red swollen foot, (this could show as discoloured on black or brown skin)
new damage to the skin of your foot (cuts, sores or breaks in the skin)
a change in your foot shape
a new pain in your foot (especially if you have painless nerve damage)
If your podiatrist or GP practice is closed, call 111.
Phone 111 if you:
Have diabetes, have new foot issues and also:
have a fever
are shivering or shaking
have nausea
are vomiting (being sick)
are feeling unwell
Testing for sensitivity in your feet
If you have diabetes, or are a carer for someone with diabetes, it can be helpful to do a test for nerve damage.
Diabetes UK have information on how to test for sensitivity in your feet
Other things that can influence your foot risk include:
kidney function
blood flow to the feet and legs
previous foot issues
Self-management of diabetic foot issues
In most cases you will be able to manage any known foot issues caused by diabetes at home, yourself.
Find out how you can do this by reading the ‘
Looking after your feet’ leaflet
found on the NHS Grampian website.
Tips for checking your feet
Do
try to check your foot using a mirror every day
look for any cuts, skin breaks or hard skin
apply moisturising cream to prevent your skin becoming too dry
try to keep your toenails short, keeping them cut and filed if you can
speak to your podiatrist if you have any issues
Don’t
do not allow the area between your toes to become too moist as this can lead to
athletes foot
Your foot risk
Your foot risk is a way of measuring how likely you are to develop foot problems.
You can check your foot risk with your health care team or on
MyDiabetesMyWay
, if you’re a registered user.
MyDiabetesMyWay
If you attend a Diabetes service, you may already be registered with
MyDiabetesMyWay
. They also have information on:
your foot risk score
foot care
footwear
keeping feet healthy
It’s free to sign up. You need to:
be over 14
registered with a GP in Scotland and
have your CHI number available
Contact your GP practice if you need to find out your CHI number.
Source:
Scottish Government