Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/stomach-liver-and-gastrointestinal-tract/diarrhoea/

---

Diarrhoea
العربية
|
Polski
|
Română
|
繁體中文
|
اردو
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Diarrhoea is passing looser, watery or more frequent poo (stools) than is normal for you.
It affects most people from time to time and is usually nothing to worry about. It can be distressing and unpleasant. It normally clears up in a few days to a week.
Self-help guide
Advice for people aged 5 years or more with diarrhoea or loose stools.
Complete our self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Phone 999 or got to A&E if you or your child:
might have swallowed something poisonous
have a stiff neck and pain when looking at bright lights
have a sudden, severe headache or stomach ache
Speak to your GP if:
You or your child has diarrhoea and:
it’s particularly frequent or severe
it lasts for more than 7 days
you’re concerned
poo with blood on it
persistent vomiting and are unable to keep fluid down
a severe or continuous stomach ache
weight loss
have passed a large amount of very watery diarrhoea
it occurs at night and is disturbing sleep
have recently taken
antibiotics
or been treated in hospital
have
signs of dehydration
– including drowsiness, peeing less than usual, and feeling lightheaded or dizzy
have poo that’s dark or black – this may be a sign of bleeding inside your stomach
Your child:
has had 6 or more episodes of diarrhoea in the past 24 hours
has diarrhoea and vomiting at the same time
has stopped drinking fluids while they’re ill
is a baby and has vomited 3 times or more in the past 24 hours
is under 12 months with diarrhoea and you’re worried
If your GP is closed, phone 111.
What causes diarrhoea?
There are many different causes of diarrhoea. A bowel infection (
gastroenteritis
) is a common cause in both adults and children.
Gastroenteritis can be caused by:
a virus – such as
norovirus
or rotavirus;
bacteria – such as campylobacter and Escherichia (E. coli), which are often picked up from contaminated food
a parasite – such as the parasite that causes giardiasis, which is spread in contaminated water
These infections can sometimes be caught during travelling abroad, particularly to areas with poor standards of public hygiene. This is known as travellers’ diarrhoea.
Diarrhoea can also be the result of anxiety, a
food allergy
, medication, or a long-term condition, such as
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
.
What to do if you have diarrhoea
Most cases of diarrhoea clear up after a few days without treatment.
You should drink plenty of fluids to avoid
dehydration
. Drink small sips of water often. It’s very important that babies and children do not become dehydrated.
Your pharmacist may suggest you use an oral rehydration solution (ORS) if you or you child are particularly at risk of dehydration.
You should eat solid foods as soon as you feel able to. If you’re breastfeeding or bottle feeding your baby and they have diarrhoea, you should try to feed them as normal.
Stay at home until at least 48 hours after the last episode of diarrhoea to prevent spreading any infection to others.
Medications to reduce diarrhoea, such as loperamide, are available. However, these are not usually necessary. Most types of medication should not be given to children.
Read
further information about managing diarrhoea
, including what to eat and drink.
How to prevent diarrhoea
Diarrhoea is often caused by an infection. You can reduce your risk by making sure you maintain high standards of hygiene.
Do
wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water after going to the toilet and before eating or preparing food
clean the toilet, including the handle and the seat, with disinfectant after each episode of diarrhoea
avoid sharing towels, flannels, cutlery, or utensils with other household members
avoid potentially unsafe tap water and undercooked food when travelling abroad
Contact NHS inform
If you’re well, but have a general non-clinical question about your health or local NHS services, you can
contact us
by:
phoning our helpline on
0800 22 44 88
starting a
webchat
texting ‘NHS inform’ and your question to 07903 588 669
Source:
NHS 24