Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/discoid-eczema/

---

Discoid eczema
Discoid eczema (discoid dermatitis) is a long-term skin condition that usually affects adults. It causes itchy, cracked and red skin in a circular shape. It can affect any part of the skin.
Symptoms of discoid eczema
Discoid eczema causes a group of red spots or bumps on the skin. These quickly join up to create larger pink, red or brown patches. These can vary in size and are usually very itchy, especially at night. The patches are often swollen, blistered and ooze fluid.
Over time, the patches may become dry, crusty, cracked and flaky with a clear centre. This creates a ring effect on the skin.
You may have one area of discoid eczema or a few patches. They can happen appear anywhere on the body, though the face and scalp are not normally affected.
Discoid eczema causes distinctive circular or oval patches of eczema.
Over time, patches of discoid eczema become dry, crusty, cracked and flaky.
Speak to your GP practice immediately if:
You have atopic eczema and:
it’s blistered, crusty, leaking fluid or has spots filled with pus
it’s painful, swollen or feels warm
it suddenly gets worse or bigger
you have a high temperature or feel unwell
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Diagnosing discoid eczema
Speak to your GP practice if you or your child have symptoms of discoid eczema.
Your GP will look at your skin and ask questions about your symptoms to help diagnose discoid eczema. They may also do some tests to rule out other conditions.
If you have severe discoid eczema, your GP may refer you to a skin specialist (dermatologist).
Getting advice from a pharmacist
A pharmacist can give you advice about discoid eczema if your symptoms are mild. For example, you have small areas of dry or slightly itchy skin. If your symptoms are more severe, speak to your GP practice.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Treatment for discoid eczema
Discoid eczema is usually a long-term problem. However, medications are available to help manage the condition and relieve symptoms.
Treatments for discoid eczema can include:
emollients – moisturisers that can be applied to the skin to stop it becoming dry
topical
corticosteroids
– ointments and creams that can be applied to the skin
oral
corticosteroids
– anti-inflammatory medicines
antibiotics
– used to treat infected eczema
antihistamines – to help reduce itching
soap substitutes – to replace soaps and cleaning products that may irritate your skin
Some treatments for discoid eczema are available over-the-counter without a prescription.
You should speak to your GP if your symptoms don’t improve after using over-the-counter medications.
You may need to try different treatments to find the best one for you. Your GP or pharmacist will discuss this with you.
Special dressings or medicines may help to treat more severe discoid eczema symptoms.
Things you can do to help discoid eczema
There are things you can do yourself to help manage the symptoms of discoid eczema.
Do
apply moisturising treatments (emollients) to your skin as often as possible
continue to moisturise even if your eczema improves
wash with an emollient instead of soap
keep your nails short and clean to reduce damage to your skin
wear soft, light clothing
have lukewarm baths and showers instead of hot ones
protect your skin from minor cuts (by wearing gloves, for example) as they may trigger discoid eczema
Don’t
do not scratch the skin as it can make your symptoms worse
–
try gently rubbing your skin with your fingers
do not use soaps and detergents that irritate your skin
do not share emollients with other people
do not put your fingers into an emollient pot – use a spoon or pump dispenser instead
What causes discoid eczema?
It’s not known what causes discoid eczema, but it can sometimes be triggered by:
a minor skin injury
–
like an
insect bite
or
burn
some medications
dry conditions
cold
skin irritation – from shampoos, body wash and cleaning products, for example
Some people with discoid eczema may have other types of eczema too, like
atopic eczema.
It’s also linked to dry skin.
Discoid eczema does not seem to run in families.
Complications of discoid eczema
Discoid eczema can cause the skin to become cracked and broken. This can sometimes lead to infections. You should see your doctor as soon as possible if you think you or your child’s skin may have become infected.
Having itchy skin caused by atopic eczema can disrupt your sleep. This may cause tiredness and difficulty concentrating during the day.
Living with atopic eczema can be difficult. If it’s affecting your mental health, you may be referred to a mental health specialist.
Source:
NHS 24