Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/dizziness-lightheadedness/

---

Dizziness (lightheadedness)
Dizziness (lightheadedness) is a common symptom. It’s not usually a sign of anything serious but it should still be investigated by a doctor.
Dizziness can mean different things to different people. Some people use it to describe feeling lightheaded or off balance. Others use it to describe a feeling that their surroundings are spinning.
Dizziness can be caused by a wide range of things. It may not always be easy to identify the underlying cause.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
You feel dizzy and:
you’re worried about your dizziness or
vertigo
it will not go away or it keeps coming back
you’re finding it harder to hear or speak
there’s ringing or other sounds in your ears (tinnitus)
you have double vision, blurred vision or other changes in your eyesight
your face, arms or legs feel numb or weak
you have other symptoms like changes to your pulse, fainting or collapsing, headaches, feeling or being sick
What happens at your GP appointment
Your GP will ask about your symptoms and may check if you have
vertigo
.
They’ll also want to know:
whether the dizziness started for no reason, or if it followed an illness
whether you have repeated episodes of dizziness and, if so, when you experience these
how long the dizziness lasts
If you’re dizzy when you’re lying down, it’s usually caused by a viral ear infection. This can’t be treated with antibiotics.
If you feel dizzy when you’re upright, it’s probably not related to your ears.
Treatments for dizziness
Dizziness usually goes away on its own. But there are things you can do to take care of yourself while you’re feeling dizzy.
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Do
lie down until the dizziness passes, then get up slowly
move slowly and carefully
get plenty of rest
drink plenty of fluids, especially water
avoid coffee, cigarettes, alcohol and drugs
Don’t
do not bend down suddenly
do not get up suddenly after sitting or lying down
do not do anything that could be dangerous while you’re dizzy, like driving, climbing a ladder or using heavy machinery
Common causes of dizziness
The most common causes of dizziness are:
an inner ear infection that affects your hearing and balance –
labyrinthitis
migraine
stress
or
anxiety
low blood sugar level (hypoglycaemia)
– which usually happens in people with diabetes
a sudden fall in blood pressure when you suddenly sit or stand (postural
hypotension
)
dehydration
or heat exhaustion
decreased blood flow in the back of the brain, which may be caused by blocked blood vessels (vertebrobasilar insufficiency)
Less common causes of dizziness
Less common causes of dizziness are:
having a severe illness or condition that affects the whole body
using recreational
drugs
drinking too much
alcohol
(either binge drinking or long-term alcohol misuse)
certain types of prescription medicine – like
antidepressants
or blood pressure medication
having a heart rhythm problem – like
atrial fibrillation
(a fast, irregular heartbeat)
carbon monoxide poisoning
Source:
NHS  24