Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mouth/dry-mouth/

---

Dry mouth
It’s normal to occasionally have a dry mouth if you’re dehydrated or feeling nervous. A persistently dry mouth can be a sign of an underlying problem though.
Contact your dentist or GP if:
You have a dry mouth and:
your mouth is still dry after trying home or pharmacy treatments for a few weeks
you have difficulty chewing, swallowing or talking
you’re struggling to eat regularly
you’re having problems with your sense of taste that are not going away
your mouth is painful, red, swollen or bleeding
you have sore white patches in your mouth
you think a prescribed medicine might be causing your dry mouth
you have other symptoms, like needing to pee a lot or dry eyes
The GP can check what the cause might be and recommend treatment for it.
What can cause a dry mouth?
A dry mouth can happen when the salivary glands in your mouth do not produce enough saliva.
This is often the result of
dehydration
.
This means you do not have enough fluid in your body to produce the saliva you need. It’s also common for your mouth to become dry if you’re feeling anxious or nervous.
A dry mouth can sometimes be caused by an underlying problem or medical condition, such as:
medication – many different medications can cause a dry mouth including
antidepressants
, antihistamines and diuretics
a blocked nose – breathing through your mouth while you sleep can cause it to dry out
diabetes
– a lifelong condition that causes a person’s blood sugar level to become too high
radiotherapy
to the head and neck – this can cause the salivary glands to become inflamed (mucositis)
Sjögren’s syndrome
– a condition where the immune system attacks and damages the salivary glands
If you contact your dentist or GP, tell them about any other symptoms you’re experiencing. Also tell them about any treatments you’re having. This will help them work out why your mouth is dry.
What problems can a dry mouth cause?
Saliva plays an important role in keeping your mouth healthy. If you have a dry mouth, you may experience some other problems, such as:
a burning sensation or soreness in your mouth
dry lips
bad breath (halitosis)
a reduced or altered sense of taste
mouth infections that keep coming back, such as
oral thrush
tooth decay
and
gum disease
difficulty speaking, eating or swallowing
It’s important to maintain good
oral hygiene
if you have a dry mouth. This can reduce the risk of dental problems. You should also see a dentist regularly, so they can identify and treat any problems early on.
Treating a dry mouth
If your doctor or dentist is able to find out what’s causing your dry mouth, treating this may help your symptoms.
If medication is suspected as a cause, for example, your doctor may lower your dose or suggest trying a different treatment.
Some of the conditions mentioned have specific treatments, like:
nasal
decongestants
for a blocked nose
insulin for diabetes
Things to try yourself
There are things you can do to help relieve your symptoms.
Do
drink plenty of cold water – take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night
suck on ice cubes or ice lollies
sip on cold unsweetened drinks
chew sugar-free gum or suck on sugar-free sweets
use lip balm if your lips are also dry
brush your teeth twice a day and use alcohol-free mouthwash – you’re more likely to get tooth decay if you have a dry mouth
Don’t
do not drink lots of alcohol, caffeine (such as tea and coffee) or fizzy drinks
do not eat foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy, salty or sugary
do not smoke
do not sleep with dentures in
do not use acidic artificial saliva products if you have your own teeth
do not stop taking a prescribed medicine without getting medical advice first – even if you think it might be causing your symptoms
Saliva substitutes and stimulants
If the measures above don’t help, your dentist, GP or specialist may suggest using an artificial saliva substitute. An artificial saliva substitute will help keep your mouth moist. This may come in the form of a spray, gel or lozenge. Use it as often as you need to, including before and during meals.
If your dry mouth is caused by radiotherapy or Sjögren’s syndrome, a medication called pilocarpine may be prescribed. This is taken as a tablet several times a day. It helps to stimulate your salivary glands to produce more saliva.
Source:
NHS 24