Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/muscular-dystrophy/duchenne-muscular-dystrophy-dmd/

---

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD)
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a muscle wasting condition that causes progressive muscle weakness. It usually only affects boys and those assigned male at birth.
It’s caused by a lack of a protein called dystrophin. This causes muscle fibres to break down. They’re replaced by fibrous or fatty tissues that cause the muscle to gradually weaken.
DMD is a severe type of MD and often shortens life expectancy. Most people with DMD will reach adulthood. They are, however, more likely to die from heart or respiratory failure before or during their 30’s.
Symptoms of Duchenne muscular dystrophy
It’s unusual for symptoms to be present from birth. Often signs will appear between 1 and 2 years of age.
Someone with DMD might experience:
difficulties running, jumping and climbing stairs
difficulty getting up from the floor
a waddling gait (walking on their toes with an arched lower back)
difficulty walking as fast or as far as other children
a tendency to fall more than other children
learning and behavioural difficulties
learning to speak later than usual
Your child might find it difficult to stand up from a seated position. Your child might use the Gowers’ manoeuvre to stand up by:
facing the floor
placing their feet wide apart
lifting their bottom first
walking their hands from their knees to their thighs to a standing position
Speak to your GP if you or your child has symptoms of:
Speak to your GP if you or your child has symptoms of:
muscle weakness
mobility problems
Causes of DMD
DMD is a type of sex linked (X-linked) muscular dystrophy.
Males have one X and one Y chromosome (long threadlike structures of DNA). Females have two X chromosomes.
A sex linked disorder is caused by a mutation in a gene on the X chromosome.
As males only have one copy of the gene on the X chromosome, they’ll be affected if one of those genes is mutated.
Because females have 2 copies of the X chromosome, they’re less likely to develop an X-linked condition. This is because the healthy copy of the chromosome can usually compensate for (mask) the mutated version. This means that although females can still be affected by X-linked disorders, the symptoms are likely to be less severe.
Diagnosing DMD
There are different methods used to diagnose muscular dystrophy.
Diagnosis might involve:
investigating your symptoms
family history
physical exam
blood tests
electrical tests on the nerves and muscles
muscle biopsy (where a sample of tissue is removed for testing)
A blood test will normally be enough to confirm a diagnosis of DMD.
Read more about how muscular dystrophy will be diagnosed
Treatment of DMD
Treatment is available to help with many of the symptoms of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Steroids
If you have Duchenne MD, corticosteroid medicine (steroids) can help improve your muscle strength and function. This can slow down the progress of muscle weakness.
Steroids are available in tablet or liquid form.
Read more about steroids and their possible side effects
Ataluren (Translarna)
Ataluren (Translarna) is used to treat some children with Duchenne MD that can still walk. It’s only effective for children with MD with a specific gene mutation.
Ataluren can help slow down the progress of muscle weakness. It’s prescribed as a sachet of granules which can be mixed into liquids or food like yoghurt and eaten.
Mobility
A child with DMD could need a wheelchair by the time they’re 11 years old. At first, it might only be for long distances. Later it’s likely to be needed full time. At this stage, they might experience difficulties with other muscles like raising their arms above shoulder height.
Orthotics
Your child might benefit from splints or a spinal brace to help with their posture and mobility.
Corrective surgery
Duchenne MD can cause scoliosis. Surgery might be used to correct or to prevent scoliosis getting worse.
Heart problems
Many people with DMD develop dilated cardiomyopathy. This affects the heart muscles. The faulty gene also affects the heart muscles and causes the heart’s chambers to enlarge and the heart muscle to get thinner.
If you have Duchenne MD, you’ll have regular electrocardiograms (ECGs) to examine your heart rhythm. You’ll also need to have an echocardiogram. An
MRI scan
might be carried out to check for heart problems.
You’ll see a cardiologist (heart specialist) for further tests and monitoring.
The cardiologist will prescribe medication to help improve your heart function.
You might have a ICD (implantable cardioverter defibrillator) inserted to help with your heart function.
Breathing problems
It’s likely your child will have breathing problems and will require a machine to help them breathe at night and sometimes during the day.
With older children, cough assist machines can help them cough up and remove secretions (phlegm). Using an Ambu bag can help to preserve their chest wall muscle strength.
There’s a risk of frequent chest infections in children with DMD. These might be treated with antibiotics.
Swallowing problems
Your child might have difficulty feeding. They might have a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube inserted to help with feeding.
Palliative care
You might want to consider hospice care to help you or your child cope with their condition. The hospice can offer help like:
counselling
pain management
Read more about palliative care
Last updated:
18 September 2024
How can we improve this page?
Help us improve NHS inform
Thank You
Your feedback has been received
Don’t include personal information e.g. name, location or any personal health conditions.
Email Address
e.g. you@example.com
Message
Maximum of 500 characters
Send feedback
Add this page to
            Info For Me
Also on NHS inform
Muscular dystrophy
Becker muscular dystrophy
Congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD)
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD)
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD)
Other health sites
Muscular Dystrophy UK
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852