Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/pregnancy-and-childbirth/losing-a-baby/early-miscarriage/

---

Early miscarriage
An early miscarriage is the loss of your pregnancy before the 12th week of pregnancy. This is the most common type of miscarriage.
A miscarriage between 12 and 24 weeks is known as a
late miscarriage
.
Symptoms of early miscarriage
The signs of early miscarriage can be mistaken for normal symptoms of pregnancy. They can include:
vaginal bleeding
stomach pain or cramping
pregnancy symptoms suddenly stopping
Experiencing these miscarriage symptoms does not mean that you’re definitely having an early miscarriage. But, you should speak with your GP, local early pregnancy service or 111 if you’re concerned.
Read more about vaginal bleeding
Vaginal bleeding can vary. It may be light spotting or brown discharge. It can also be a heavier bleed that’s similar to (or heavier than) your normal period.
Light bleeding and spotting before 12 weeks of pregnancy is common. It’s often not a sign of miscarriage. But you should always seek help if you have bleeding at any point in your pregnancy, whether or not you’re in pain. Contact your maternity unit, phone 111, or self-refer to an
early pregnancy unit
.
If you’re bleeding, use a clean sanitary pad or period pants. Do not use tampons or period cups. They can increase the risk of infection.
It’s a good idea to monitor the bleeding and make a note of what it’s like, so you can tell your doctor, nurse or midwife. Think about how much there is, what colour it is, and whether there are any big lumps or clots.
Read more about stomach pain or cramping
It’s not unusual to experience some stomach pain or light cramps in early pregnancy. They can be caused by:
your uterus (womb) expanding
your ligaments stretching as your bump grows
hormones
constipation
trapped wind
However, cramping and pain in your lower abdomen (tummy) may be a sign of miscarriage. If you’re concerned about any pain, contact your maternity unit, phone 111, or self-refer to an
early pregnancy unit
.
Read more about pregnancy symptoms suddenly stopping
If you have a miscarriage, you may find your pregnancy symptoms disappear. For example, you stop feeling sick, or find your breasts are no longer tender.
However, these symptoms can also disappear after your first trimester.
If you’re concerned about your pregnancy symptoms stopping, contact your maternity unit, phone 111, or self-refer to an
early pregnancy unit
.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if you:
have sharp, sudden and intense stomach pains
feel very dizzy or faint
feel very sick
look very pale
have vaginal bleeding or spotting, commonly after the pain has started
have pain in your shoulder tip
have diarrhoea and are vomiting
Contact your local early pregnancy service or GP practice immediately if:
you’re bleeding from your vagina
you’ve got strong, cramping pain
your waters break
If your GP is closed, phone NHS 24 on 111.
Causes of early miscarriage
It’s not always possible to tell why a miscarriage happened. It’s unlikely to be caused by anything you did or did not do.
Read more about the causes of miscarriage
Treating an early miscarriage
There’s no way to stop a miscarriage once it has started. But there are different treatments available to help manage your miscarriage. The treatment you’re offered will depend on what type of miscarriage you’re having.
The doctor, nurse or midwife treating you will use an ultrasound scan to confirm what type of miscarriage you’re having.
Complete miscarriage
In a complete miscarriage, the pregnancy comes away from the womb by itself.
Once confirmed, you’ll not need to stay in hospital. You’ll be able to manage your symptoms at home.
You’ll be given advice on over-the-counter painkillers. It’s normal to bleed for up to 3 weeks after a miscarriage. This means you’ll need extra-absorbent sanitary products. External sanitary products, like pads or period pants, are recommended. Internal sanitary products, like tampons, increase the risk of infection.
It’s recommended that you take a pregnancy test 2-3 weeks after your miscarriage. This will make sure that it’s complete.
Missed or incomplete miscarriage
A missed miscarriage happens when you’ve lost your pregnancy without showing any symptoms. With a missed miscarriage, there’s a risk that pregnancy tissue is left in the womb.
An incomplete miscarriage is when some of your pregnancy is left in your womb.
If pregnancy tissue is left in the womb, it can cause infection and make you very unwell.
There are 3 options for managing a missed or incomplete miscarriage. Those treating you will talk with you about your options. You’ll be given time to consider what you’d like to do.
You may wish to have someone with you at this time. This is possible for all types of management, though they may not be able to be with you during surgery if you need or decide on surgical management. Those caring for you will discuss this with you.
The 3 options are expectant management, medical management and surgical management.
Read more about expectant management
Expectant management is when you wait for the miscarriage to finish by itself. This happens in about half of people who have expectant management.
You don’t need to stay in hospital for expectant management, but it can take some time for the bleeding to start.
You’ll be given contact details of who to contact if:
you have any concerns about your health or the progress of your miscarriage
you change your mind about your management option
You’ll also be given information about what you can do with your baby’s remains.
You’ll be offered prescription painkillers or be given advice on over-the-counter painkillers.
When your miscarriage does start, you’ll feel cramping pain. This may be intense. You’ll bleed heavily and pass large clots.
Seek medical advice immediately if:
you soak through more than 2 heavy flow sanitary pads per hour, for 3 hours in a row
you develop a high temperature (fever)
you have severe pain or cramping that you cannot manage with pain relief
You’ll be asked to take a pregnancy test after 3 weeks. You may also be offered an ultrasound to check all pregnancy tissue has come away. If the treatment has not worked, you may be offered:
continued expectant management
medical management
surgical management
Expectant management might not be recommended to you if:
you have an increased risk of haemorrhage (severe bleeding)
you’re at increased risk from the effects of haemorrhage (severe bleeding), like if you’re unable to have a blood transfusion
you have an infection
Read more about medical management
During medical management you’ll be given 2 tablets to take. These are called mifepristone and misoprostal. These tablets help the pregnancy tissue to come away from your uterus (womb).
Medical management is effective in 85 out of 100 people.
You’ll take mifepristone first. This blocks the hormones that allow pregnancy to continue. 36 to 48 hours after taking mifepristone, you’ll take a dose of misoprostol.
A few hours after taking misoprostol, you’ll start bleeding.
It’s normal to experience some pain after taking misoprostol. Different people have different experiences, but people often:
have cramps that are more intense than your usual period
have heavy bleeding
pass blood clots
The pregnancy sac will pass with the clots.
You’ll be offered pain relief and anti-sickness medication. You may also be able to take ibuprofen or paracetamol up to the recommended safe dose. A hot water bottle or heat pack can also provide some relief.
In most cases, you’ll be able to go home while you wait for the miscarriage to complete.
Seek medical advice immediately if:
you soak through more than 2 heavy flow sanitary pads per hour, for 3 hours in a row
you develop a high temperature (fever)
you’ve severe pain or cramping that you cannot manage with pain relief
You’ll be asked to take a pregnancy test after 3 weeks. If the treatment has not worked, you may be offered more further medical management. You may also be offered surgical management.
Read more about surgical management
Surgical management means having surgery to remove the pregnancy. It’s effective in 95 out of 100 people.
During the operation you’ll be given an anaesthetic. This may be a local anaesthetic, which numbs the area involved but leaves you awake. It may also be a general anaesthetic, which means you’ll be asleep for the procedure.
After the anaesthetic has worked, your cervix will be gently opened with a small tube. Any remains of your pregnancy will then be removed with a suction device.
The surgery is safe, but like any operation, there is a small risk of complications. These include:
heavy bleeding
infection
damage to the womb
You should be able to go home the same day, once you’ve recovered from the anaesthetic.
You’ll be given advice on over-the-counter painkillers.
It’s normal to bleed for up to 3 weeks after a miscarriage. This means you’ll need extra-absorbent sanitary products. External sanitary products, like pads or period pants, are recommended. Internal sanitary products, like tampons, increase the risk of infection.
Contact your GP practice or local early pregnancy service if:
you soak through more than 2 heavy flow sanitary pads per hour, for 3 hours in a row
you develop a high temperature (fever) and flu-like symptoms
you have severe pain or cramping that you cannot manage with prescription or over the counter pain relief
you have smelly vaginal discharge
you have increasing stomach pain, combined with a fever, appetite loss and nausea
you feel burning and stinging when you pee, or you’re peeing frequently
you have a leg that is painful, red, swollen or hot
you’re having difficulty bearing weight on your legs
If your GP practice is closed, phone NHS 24 on 111.
You may be advised to have surgical management immediately if:
you’re bleeding heavily and continuously
there are signs of infection
medicine to remove the pregnancy has been tried without success
Your feelings and emotions
Miscarriage, no matter when it happens, can be a very upsetting experience.
It may take some time to recover, physically and emotionally. It’s important to take the time you need. But if you are struggling to cope, talk to your GP. They’ll help you get more support.
Read more about coping after a miscarriage
Source:
                                        Scottish Government