Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/eating-disorders/

---

Eating disorders
Eating disorder (BSL)
|
Eating disorder (audio)
Eating disorders are serious mental health conditions. Someone with an eating disorder will have eating behaviours like eating too much or too little regularly. They’ll also spend a lot of time thinking about food and their weight or body shape.
Eating disorders can have a significant impact on health, wellbeing, and relationships. They can also have an impact on your day to day activities.
Types of eating disorders
There are different types of eating and feeding disorders, including:
anorexia nervosa (AN)
avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID)
binge eating disorder (BED)
bulimia nervosa (BN)
other specific feeding and eating disorders (OSFED)
Beat estimate that
around 1.25 million people in the UK have an eating disorder
.
Eating disorders can affect people of all ages, genders, cultures, ethnicities and backgrounds. With treatment, most people can experience an improved quality of life.
Eating disorders often first present in childhood or adolescence. They can impact on the young person as well as their family members or carers.
Read more about how to support someone with an eating disorder
Symptoms of an eating disorder
Symptoms of an eating disorder include:
spending a lot of time worrying about your weight, body shape and food
avoiding socialising if it involves food
eating very little or a large quantity of food
feeling that your eating is out of control
making yourself sick or taking laxatives after you eat
exercising too much
having very strict habits or routines around food
changes in your mood like being withdrawn, anxious or depressed
difficulty concentrating on day to day activities like work or study
Your relationships with those closest to you can also be affected.
You might also experience physical symptoms like:
feeling dizzy, tired or cold
pains, tingling or numbness in your arms and legs, because of poor circulation
feeling your heart racing, fainting or feeling faint
bloating, constipation or diarrhoea due to problems with your digestion
your weight being low or high for someone your age and height
not getting your period or delayed signs of puberty
Warning signs of an eating disorder in someone else
It can be difficult to identify that a loved one has an eating disorder. There are warning signs you can look out for like:
weight loss or weight gain over a few months
lack of awareness or belief that they are developing unusual eating behaviours
eating a lot of food very fast or food going missing
going to the bathroom a lot after eating
talking critically about their body
over-exercising
avoiding mealtimes with others
cutting food into small pieces or eating very slowly
wearing loose or baggy clothes
Read more about how to support someone with an eating disorder
Related conditions
Someone with an eating disorder may also have:
anxiety
autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
complex trauma
personality disorders
depression
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
mental health conditions during pregnancy and
after the birth
post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
psychotic conditions including
schizophrenia
and
bipolar disorder
substance misuse
alcohol misuse
type 1 diabetes
other physical illnesses, particularly those where symptoms and signs affect body weight or where treatment might affect body weight such as
Cystic Fibrosis
,
underactive thyroid
,
overactive thyroid
or
inflammatory bowel disease
Peace Pathway
has information and resources for autistic people with an eating disorder.
If you have any other health conditions it’s important to discuss this with your healthcare professional so they can assess how this could impact your treatment.
Other conditions that affect food and eating
Some conditions involve food and eating, but aren’t related to concerns about weight or body shape. These include
avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID)
. ARFID causes a person to avoid certain foods or types of food, restrict how much they eat, or both.
Learn more about ARFID on the Beat website
Causes of eating disorders
Eating disorders are often blamed on the social pressure to be thin, but the causes are usually more complex. There are lots of possible reasons why a person might develop an eating disorder. The causes are different for everybody.
These causes can be psychological, environmental, and biological.
Treatment for eating disorders
An eating disorder can have a major impact on your life. It can affect your relationships, job, schoolwork, and physical health.
With all eating disorders, the first step is recognising that there’s a problem and being willing to seek help.
If you’re worried that you have an eating disorder, see a GP as soon as you can.
It can be very hard to admit that you have a problem and ask for help. Many people feel scared about asking for help but its important to get this help as soon as possible. It might help to bring a friend or loved one with you to your appointment.
Getting help for someone else with an eating disorder
Your loved one might not know they have an eating disorder. They might deny it or avoid talking about their eating or their weight because it’s such a painful stressful subject for them.
Let them know you’re worried about them and encourage them to see a GP. You could even offer to go with them.
Read more about supporting someone with an eating disorder
There’s a lot of information and advice available for parents and carers, including:
Beat: What to do if you’re worried about a friend or family member
Beat: What to do if you’re worried about a colleague
Supported: I care for someone with an eating disorder
FEAST: Info for parents
Types of treatment for eating disorders
Treating an eating disorder usually involves monitoring physical health and supporting mental health.
The type of treatment used depends on:
the person involved
what type of eating disorder they have
For some people, self-help or guided self-help can be effective. When guided self-help isn’t appropriate, or wouldn’t be effective enough on its own, a common treatment is
psychological therapy
. This may be working individually, in a group or as a family. Specialist dietitians may also be part of your treatment. Your physical health may also be monitored to support your recovery.
For some people it can be helpful to prescribe medication in combination with psychological treatment. Medication alone isn’t usually effective for eating disorders.
Read about the SIGN clinical guidelines for treatment of an eating disorder in Scotland
Further support
Find information and services that can offer advice and support about eating disorders
Source:
Scottish Government