Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/pregnancy-and-childbirth/losing-a-baby/ectopic-pregnancy/

---

Ectopic pregnancy
An ectopic pregnancy happens when a fertilised egg implants in the wrong place. An ectopic pregnancy is almost always unable to survive. Cases where an ectopic pregnancy survives have been reported, but they are exceptionally rare.
About 1 in 80 pregnancies are ectopic. Like any pregnancy loss, an ectopic pregnancy can be deeply upsetting. You may need some time to recover emotionally as well as physically.
How an ectopic pregnancy happens
After an egg is released by the ovary, it travels along a fallopian tube. There, it can meet a sperm and becomes fertilised.
After fertilisation, it should continue along the fallopian tube into the uterus (womb). Usually, a fertilised egg will then implant in the uterus and start to develop.
Diagram of the female reproductive system provided by Public Health Scotland
In an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilised egg either does not reach or does not stop in the uterus. Instead, it implants somewhere it cannot fully develop.
In most ectopic pregnancies, the fertilised egg implants in one of the fallopian tubes. Less commonly, the fertilised egg implants in the ovary, cervix, or abdomen. It can also implant in a caesarean scar, or other places in within the womb wall.
Ectopic pregnancy can be life-threatening. Even though it’s in the wrong place, the egg will still try to develop and get bigger. As it gets bigger, an ectopic pregnancy can rupture (burst), causing damage and internal bleeding. If this happens, a person can lose a lot of blood into their abdomen (tummy) before starting to experience symptoms.
Symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy
The signs of an ectopic pregnancy can vary from person to person, and will depend on where the ectopic pregnancy is.
Symptoms are commonly experienced around the 6th to 7th week of pregnancy. But, they can appear anywhere between 4 and 12 weeks of pregnancy.
Symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy might include:
pain in your lower abdomen (tummy) – this might come on quickly or gradually, and can be widespread or on one side only
vaginal bleeding – this might be like your normal period or it may be lighter or heavier or darker than normal
upset stomach
sudden diarrhoea
pain when you pee, that may feel like a urinary tract infection (UTI)
pain when you poo, or in your back passage
new pain in the tip of your shoulder
Read more about ectopic pregnancy symptoms
Phone 999 or go to A&E if you may be pregnant and you:
have new severe pain in your abdomen (tummy)
have new severe pain in the tip of your shoulder that is worse when laying down, and is not helped by painkillers
feel dizzy
have fainted or collapsed
Get medical help if you may be pregnant and:
have pain in your lower abdomen that can come on quickly or gradually, and can be widespread or on one side only
have vaginal bleeding
have an upset stomach and diarrhoea
have pain when you have a bowel movement (poo)
have a urinary tract infection
have pain when you pee
Contact your GP or your local
early pregnancy service
. If your GP is closed, contact NHS 24 on 111.
Diagnosing an ectopic pregnancy
In an emergency situation, an ectopic pregnancy will be diagnosed quickly. You’ll receive treatment straight away.
If you only have mild symptoms, diagnosing an ectopic pregnancy can take a little longer. Your doctor, nurse or midwife will run tests to see if your pregnancy is ectopic. These tests may include:
a pregnancy test, if you’ve not already done one
a physical examination of your abdomen (tummy)
a transvaginal ultrasound scan, where a slim ultrasound probe is inserted into your vagina for an internal scan
Most ectopic pregnancies are diagnosed with a transvaginal ultrasound scan. However, it’s quite common for your first ultrasound scan will not show where your pregnancy is. This is called having a pregnancy of unknown location (PUL). It can mean that:
your pregnancy is not in the right place, but hasn’t been found
your pregnancy is in the right place, but is too small to be seen on an ultrasound
you’ve had an
early miscarriage
You’ll be offered blood tests to look for changes in your pregnancy hormones, and may be asked to come back for further ultrasound scans. In these cases, you’ll usually be diagnosed within 4 days. In rarer cases, it can take a few weeks of follow up for your diagnosis.
Treating an ectopic pregnancy
The treatment you’re offered will depend on different things, including:
how many weeks pregnant you are
your symptoms
your test results
Your doctor, nurse or midwife will discuss your options with you, and what it might mean for your health and fertility (ability to get pregnant) in the future. They’ll work with you to plan your treatment.
If your fallopian tube ruptures, you’ll be offered emergency surgery. This is because you’re at high risk of severe bleeding, which could be life-threatening. There’s no other way to treat a ruptured fallopian tube.
There are 3 different treatments for ectopic pregnancies that are not an emergency. Depending on your circumstances, you may be offered:
expectant management
medical treatment
surgical treatment
Expectant management
Expectant management is when you wait and see if the ectopic pregnancy ends by itself. Your doctor, nurse or midwife will use your hormone levels to decide if this is a safe option for you. They’ll also continue to monitor your hormone levels to make sure it remains a safe option for you.
If the ectopic pregnancy does end by itself, you’re likely to have some bleeding. You should use external period products (like pads) rather than internal period products (like tampons) at this time. This reduces the risk of infection.
If expectant management is not effective, you’ll be offered other options.
Medical treatment
In some cases, an ectopic pregnancy may be treated by medication. You’ll receive an injection of a drug called methotrexate. This drug stops the ectopic pregnancy from growing.
It’s most likely that you’ll only need 1 injection of methotrexate. However, 15% of people who have methotrexate will need a second injection.
There’s a chance you’ll still need surgical treatment if this doesn’t work. This is more likely if your pregnancy is further along, or if your pregnancy hormone levels are high.
After the injection, you may need to return to the clinic or ward for blood tests. This is to make sure that the pregnancy has ended.
If you have any bleeding after the pregnancy has ended, you should use external period products (like pads) rather than internal period products (like tampons) at this time. This reduces the risk of infection.
If this treatment is effective, you’ll not need to have surgery.
Surgical treatment
An ectopic pregnancy that needs emergency treatment will always require surgery. But surgery is also a treatment option for non-emergency cases.
There are 2 types of surgery for ectopic pregnancy. Both types of surgery will remove the ectopic pregnancy.
Where possible, surgeons will use keyhole surgery (also called a laparoscopy). In this type of surgery, the surgeons use a tiny camera to work inside your body. This means they only need to make a small cut in your abdomen (tummy).
In some cases, like if there’s internal bleeding, the surgeons may need to make a larger cut. This is called open surgery, or a laparotomy.
The type of operation you’ll be offered will depend on:
the urgency of your surgery
the damage that your ectopic pregnancy may have caused
your plans for a future pregnancy
Sometimes keyhole surgery has to change to open surgery. This can happen for a number of reasons.
If your ectopic pregnancy is in the fallopian tube, it is likely that the tube will be damaged. This means your surgeon will need to remove it. This can help to reduce the risk of you having another ectopic pregnancy in the future.
Pregnancy after an ectopic pregnancy
Having an ectopic pregnancy does not mean that you’re unable to have a successful pregnancy in the future. Even if you’ve had a fallopian tube removed, you have a good chance of getting pregnant again. Your remaining fallopian tube will be able to “pick up” an egg from the opposite ovary.
It’s recommended to wait for a while after an ectopic pregnancy before you try to get pregnant again. You should wait:
3 to 6 months after medical management, following the advice of your doctor or midwife
until you’ve had 2 periods after surgical treatment
In both cases, you should also wait until you feel emotionally ready to try again.
As soon as you know you’re pregnant, contact your local maternity service. Let them know that you’ve previously had an ectopic pregnancy. They may offer you additional scans to make sure that the pregnancy is in the right place.
Support after an ectopic pregnancy
You may feel grief and loss, and you may also feel anxiety about getting pregnant again.
Read more about coping after you’ve lost a baby
Read more about getting pregnant again after ectopic pregnancy
If you feel you need further support after the loss, talk to your GP. They will be able to offer further guidance on support options.
Source:
                                        Scottish Government