Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/feeling-of-something-in-your-throat-globus/

---

Feeling of something in your throat (Globus)
Globus is a symptom that can make you feel like you have a lump in your throat. It’s also called ‘globus sensation’.
Globus is usually not a sign of anything serious. It can be caused by many things, such as an increased tension of muscles or irritation in the throat. Your throat can be irritated by, for example, reflux.
There are things you can do to help your globus symptoms at home, without the need to attend your GP.
Symptoms of globus
Different people describe globus differently. It may be felt as:
tightness or a pressure in your throat
mucus that you cannot clear (
catarrh
)
an area of discomfort in your throat
a feeling of something stuck or a lump in your throat
If you feel something sticking in your throat, but can eat and drink normally and without pain, you do not need to worry.
Your symptoms may:
be most noticeable you’re swallowing your saliva
get worse with stress and worry
vary from day to day
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
you develop any difficulty or pain when swallowing
you feel a lump in the neck
you experience unintentional weight loss
your symptoms do not improve
If your symptoms do not improve, your GP will provide further support and advice on whether you need to see an ear nose and throat (ENT) specialist.
Treatment for globus at home
There are a number of things you can do to try to relieve globus symptoms.
In most people, symptoms will get better following these self-help tips. However, for some people symptoms can recur off and on for several months.
Eating and drinking
Do
drink at least 1.5 litres (3 pints) of water every day – drink in small sips as swallowing helps to relax the throat
avoid too much alcohol, tea, coffee and fizzy drinks
reduce the amount of fatty and spicy food in your diet
leave at least 3 hours between your last meal and going to bed
try anti-reflux medication (ask a pharmacist for advice)
Stop smoking
Smoking causes irritation to your throat. By stopping smoking, you can help to improve your globus symptoms.
Further information on stopping smoking
Avoid clearing your throat
Try not to clear your throat as this can make your globus sensation worse. Try sipping water instead.
Maintain a healthy weight
Losing any excess weight may reduce your symptoms.
Reduce stress
Stress can increase your globus sensation.
If you think you might be stressed, try to relax in a way that is doable for you and your situation.
Breathing and relaxation exercises
can sometimes help. If you feel you need further help with managing stress, your GP can discuss this with you.
Further information about relieving stress
Source:
ENT Scotland