Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/chronic-pain/fibromyalgia/

---

Fibromyalgia
Fibromyalgia is a long-term condition that causes pain all over the body.
Symptoms of fibromyalgia
The main symptom of fibromyalgia is widespread pain that might feel like:
an ache
a burning sensation
a sharp stabbing pain
a mixture of these 3 feelings
The pain is likely to be continuous, but it might be better or more severe at different times.
As well as widespread pain, people with fibromyalgia might also have:
increased sensitivity to sensations like touch, light, temperature, noise
fatigue (extreme tiredness)
muscle stiffness
difficulty sleeping
problems with mental processes (known as “fibro-fog”) – like problems with memory and concentration
headaches
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
– a digestive condition that causes stomach pain and bloating
dizziness and clumsiness
feeling too hot or too cold
restless legs syndrome
tingling, numbness, prickling or burning sensations in your hands and feet (pins and needles, also known as paraesthesia)
unusually painful periods (if you get periods)
anxiety
depression
Speak to your GP or healthcare professional if:
you think you might have fibromyalgia
Watch Flippin’ Pain’s Flippin’ Fibromyalgia webinar to learn more about fibromyalgia
Causes of fibromyalgia
It’s not clear why some people develop fibromyalgia. The exact cause is unknown, but it’s likely that many factors are involved.
Altered pain messages
Your brain, nerves and spinal cord make up your central nervous system. Changes in the way your central nervous system sends and receives information to your body might cause fibromyalgia.
Fibromyalgia is a type of chronic pain.
Read more about chronic pain
Genetics
Some people are more likely than others to develop fibromyalgia because of the genes inherited (passed on) from their parents.
Triggers
Fibromyalgia is often triggered by a stressful event. This might be a physically stressful event or an emotionally (psychologically) stressful event.
Possible triggers of fibromyalgia might be:
an injury
a viral infection
giving birth
an operation
the breakdown of a relationship
being in an abusive relationship
the death of a loved one
Sometimes there isn’t an obvious trigger.
Diagnosing fibromyalgia
Diagnosing fibromyalgia can be difficult. There’s no specific test to diagnose the condition.
The symptoms of fibromyalgia can vary. The symptoms can be similar to those of several other conditions. Your GP will have to rule out other conditions with similar symptoms.
You’ll be asked about how your symptoms are affecting your daily life. You’ll be examined to check for signs of other conditions. They’ll check for swollen joints which might suggest arthritis, rather than fibromyalgia.
Tests to check for some of these conditions include urine and
blood tests
. You may also have
X-rays
and other scans. If you’re found to have another condition, you could still have fibromyalgia as well.
Criteria for diagnosing fibromyalgia
For fibromyalgia to be diagnosed, certain criteria usually have to be met. The most widely used criteria for diagnosis are:
you have pain in multiple areas of your body
your symptoms have stayed at a similar level for at least 3months
your symptoms can’t be explained by any other reason
you feel unrefreshed after sleep
you have problems thinking or remembering (cognitive difficulties)
you experience fatigue
Diagnosing other conditions
It’s also possible to have other conditions alongside fibromyalgia, like:
depression
anxiety
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
osteoarthritis
hypermobility spectrum disorder
Identifying all possible conditions will help to guide your treatment.
Treating fibromyalgia
Fibromyalgia is a long term (chronic) condition.
There’s no cure for fibromyalgia. But there are treatments to help relieve some of the symptoms. This can make the condition easier to live with.
Traditional treatments like pain medication aren’t always helpful for people with fibromyalgia. Learning about your condition and finding the best self management approaches for you is the best way to manage it.
A healthcare professional can help you explore your options.
Exercise, movement and activity
Exercise, movement and activity can be helpful way to manage pain.
A physiotherapist can help you to develop self-management skills to reduce the impact of pain on your life. They might help you create a tailored exercise programme suited to your needs, abilities and goals.
Physiotherapy can also help prevent further loss of strength and increase your fitness.
Pain management moveme
n
t videos
Visit the
living with chronic pain page
for more information about exercise and relaxation techniques.
Occupational therapy can help you manage your everyday activities around fibromyalgia. The aim is to do this without increasing your pain or overwhelming yourself.
Your occupational therapist may suggest new ways to do things. They may be able to support you to continue to work, if you want to.
Access to Work
has information on how to get or stay in work if you have a health condition or disability.
Group support
Some pain clinics offer pain management programmes run by a team of specialists. These specialists can include physiotherapists and psychologists. They can provide support to develop coping skills and manage your activity levels.
Speak to your GP if you think you’d benefit from a pain management programme.
Talking therapies
Talking therapies can help you manage the stress of living with fibromyalgia.
Examples of talking therapies are:
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) – a treatment approach to help you understand the link between how we think and what we do
acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) – often used for pain management
Medication
Medication can’t cure fibromyalgia but it can help reduce some symptoms. Speak to your GP or pain specialist to find out the potential benefits and risks.
Your GP will likely suggest you try exercise, CBT and physiotherapy first. This is because these treatments are more likely to help.
Antidepressants
can help some people with fibromyalgia. They help:
relieve pain
treat sleep problems
This can be useful even if you haven’t been diagnosed with depression.
Other medications can be used for the treatment of fibromyalgia symptoms, but they’re likely to be less effective.
Speak to your GP, pharmacist or healthcare professional if you’re taking medication and you don’t feel its helping.
Alternative therapies
Some people with fibromyalgia try complementary or alternative treatments, like acupuncture or massage.
There’s little scientific evidence that these treatments help in the long term. Some people find that certain treatments help them to relax and feel less stressed. This allows them to cope with their condition better.
If you decide to use complementary or herbal remedies and you have any concerns, check with your local pharmacist or healthcare professional first. Some remedies can react unpredictably with other medication, or make it less effective.
Read more about herbal medicines
Source:
                                        NHS Scotland