Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/children-and-young-peoples-muscles-bones-and-joints/flat-feet-in-children-and-young-people/

---

Flat feet in children and young people
A flat foot is when the arch on the inside of the foot is reduced or absent while standing. The foot can also look like the ankle bone on the inside is more prominent or that the whole foot seems tilted.
It’s quite normal for children and young people to have flexible flat feet.
What causes flat feet?
Most children have some degree of flat foot, and it’s usually quite normal. This is because children have more springy tissues than adults. They also have slightly more fat in the soles of their feet. This makes their feet look flatter.
Everyone is different and some children appear to have flatter feet than others. This sort of variation is normal.
Should flat feet be treated?
Using insoles or special exercises isn’t recommended. This is because the feet will develop normally without them.
Studies have shown that insoles or arch supports do not help the arches of the foot to develop in childhood. Most children will have normal arches by age 14.
What can be done to help with flat feet?
Some activities may be helpful in strengthening the muscles in the feet. Try to encourage your child to stand and walk on their tip-toes for short periods.
The older your child is the easier it can be to encourage them to do this. For young children, you can try making this activity a game, where they copy your movements.
This may not change how their foot looks.
Choosing footwear
Try to choose supportive and well fitted shoes. As children grow they’ll need their feet measured regularly.
What if the feet are still flat at age 14?
Children who don’t develop a normal arch by 14 very rarely have any problems with their feet.
Some young people and adults with flexible flat feet can develop ankle or knee pain. An arch supporting shoe or insole can be helpful at that stage.
When should you speak to a healthcare professional?
Very occasionally a flat foot can be a sign of a more serious problem.
Contact your healthcare professional if:
only one foot is flat
the foot is painful
Special tests, like x-rays, are not usually needed. The healthcare professional will be able to spot this by examining your child.
If your healthcare professional is happy there’s nothing to worry about. Your child’s feet are normal. They will not limit your child in any way.
Source:
NHS 24 CYP MSK Expert Panel