Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/flu/

---

Flu
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Flu (influenza) is a common infectious viral illness. You can catch flu all year round, but it’s especially common in winter. This is why it’s also known as seasonal flu.
You can catch flu many times because flu viruses change regularly. Your body won’t have a natural resistance to the new versions.
Flu symptoms
Some of the main symptoms of flu include:
a sudden high temperature
tiredness and weakness
a
headache
general aches and pains
a dry, chesty
cough
sore throat
difficulty sleeping
loss of appetite
diarrhoea
or tummy pain
feeling sick and being sick
chills
a runny or blocked nose
sneezing
The symptoms are similar for children. They may also get pain in their ear and be less active.
How long do symptoms last
The symptoms of flu usually develop 1 to 3 days after becoming infected. Most people will feel better within a week.
But, you may have a lingering cough and still feel very tired for a few more weeks.
Flu-like illness self-help guide
Advice for people of all ages with the symptoms of cold or flu.
Complete our self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
you have severe
chest pain
in the middle of your chest that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
Contact your GP practice urgently if you:
are more short of breath than usual
have pain when breathing in or coughing
are feeling confused, dizzy, or lightheaded
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
are coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
have
heart palpitations
– this may feel like your heart is racing, going too slowly or skipping a beat or like a fluttering feeling in your chest
are peeing less than usual – this can be a sign of
dehydration
have a very high or low temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or you’re shivering
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Get advice from a pharmacist
A pharmacist can give you advice about how to treat flu.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Treating flu at home
If you have flu, there are things you can do to help you recover more quickly.
Do
rest
get plenty of sleep
keep warm
drink lots of water to avoid dehydration
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to lower your temperature and treat aches and pains
stay off work or school until you feel better
Don’t
do not take paracetamol and flu remedies that contain paracetamol at the same time
GPs don’t recommend antibiotics for flu. They won’t relieve your symptoms or speed up your recovery.
Preventing the spread of flu
Flu is spread by germs from coughs and sneezes. These can live on hands and surfaces for 24 hours.
You can help stop yourself catching flu or spreading it to others with good hygiene measures.
Do
wash your hands regularly with soap and warm water
clean surfaces like your computer keyboard, telephone and door handles regularly
use tissues to cover your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze
bin used tissues as soon as possible
avoid unnecessary contact with other people while you’re infectious
stay off work or school until you’re feeling better
How to wash your hands properly
Help to keep germs at bay by washing your hands properly.
This video requires Marketing cookies.
Update your consent
.
The difference between flu and a cold
It can sometimes be difficult to tell if you have flu or
a cold.
Flu symptoms:
come on quickly
usually include fever and aching muscles
are more severe
Cold symptoms:
come on gradually
mainly affect your nose and throat
are fairly mild, so you can still get around and are usually well enough to go to work
https://eur01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fpodcasters.spotify.com%2Fpod%2Fshow%2Ftalking-24%2Fepisodes%2F9–Cold-Vs-Flu—Whats-the-difference-e96uqe%2Fa-a130gs6&data=05%7C01%7Crobert.smillie%40nhs24.scot.nhs.uk%7C65fe2aa44e3941a7593608dbd177bd43%7C10efe0bda0304bca809cb5e6745e499a%7C0%7C0%7C638334084423898020%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=zrduzDVV4AQCtuxOJ%2FttiEE9ZVm%2FvU4NK7Fnz9x7dfo%3D&reserved=0
Flu vaccine
The annual flu vaccine can help reduce your risk of getting flu each year.
It’s offered every year for free by the NHS to help protect people at risk of flu and its complications.
Further information about the flu vaccine for adults
Further information about the flu vaccine for children
Source:
NHS 24