Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/fungal-nail-infection/

---

Fungal nail infection
A fungal nail infection is when the the nail becomes thick, discoloured and easy to break. It’s not a serious infection but it can take a long time to treat.
Symptoms of fungal nail infection
A fungal nail infection often affects the toenails but it can happen on the fingernails too.
The infection develops slowly. It usually starts at the edge of the nail before spreading to the rest of the nail.
The infection can make the nail:
white or yellow
easy to break
thick
Sometimes the whole nail can break off which may cause the skin around it to become painful and swollen.
The following images were sourced from
dermnetnz.org
.
A fungal nail infection usually starts at the edge of the nail.
Fungal nail infections develop slowly and can spread to multiple nails.
A fungal nail infection can cause the nail to become white and yellow. It may also crumble or break easily.
Diagnosing fungal nail infection
A pharmacist can help if you think you have a fungal nail infection. You should speak to a pharmacist if the look of your nail bothers you or it’s painful.
The pharmacist will be able to recommend the best treatment for you.
Speak to your GP practice if:
You have a fungal nail infection and:
the infection is severe and treatment has not worked
the infection has spread to other nails
you have diabetes – foot problems can be more serious if you have diabetes
you have a weakened immune system – for example, you have had an organ transplant or are having chemotherapy
Treatment for fungal nail infection
A fungal nail infection is unlikely to get better without treatment. However, treatments can take a long time and can sometimes cause side effects.
Antifungal nail medicine
A pharmacist may suggest an antifungal nail medicine that you brush onto the nail.
You’ll need to use this regularly for a few months before you start to see an improvement.
You should keep using the treatment until you’re told to stop. Stopping too early could cause the infection to return.
Antifungal tablets
If treatments from a pharmacy don’t work, your GP may prescribe antifungal tablets.
Before starting treatment, your GP will take a sample of your nail to test what kind of infection you have.
Your GP may also need to do a blood test before and during your treatment. This is to check that your liver is working properly.
You may need to take antifungal tablets for up to 6 months.
The tablets can have side effects including:
headaches
an itchy rash
stomach ache
feeling sick
diarrhoea
You can’t take antifungal tablets if you have certain conditions. This includes liver or kidney disease. They may also be unsuitable if you’re pregnant or breastfeeding.
Nail removal
Sometimes badly infected nails need to be removed. This is a small procedure that’s done while the area is numbed under
local anaesthetic.
What causes fungal nail infection?
Most fungal nail infections are caused by a fungus that causes athlete’s foot. This fungus can multiply in warm, dark and moist places like the feet. This leads to infections.
You’re more likely to get a fungal nail infection if:
your feet are constantly warm and damp
you wear shoes that make your feet hot and sweaty
you don’t keep your feet clean and dry
you have damaged your nails
you have a weakened immune system
you have certain other health conditions, like
diabetes
,
psoriasis
or peripheral arterial disease
How is fungal nail infection passed on?
Fungal nail infections can spread from other people. This means you’re more likely to get it if you walk around barefoot in places like communal showers and gyms.
How to prevent fungal nail infection
There are some steps that you can take to help prevent fungal nail infections.
Do
treat athlete’s foot as soon as possible to prevent it spreading to your nails
keep your nails short
wear clean socks every day
wear flip-flops in showers at the gym or pool
replace old shoes
wash your towels regularly
Don’t
do not wear shoes that make your feet hot and sweaty
do not share towels, socks or shoes with other people
do not walk around barefoot in public pools, showers, and locker rooms
do not share nail clippers or scissors with other people
Source:
NHS 24