Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/arm-shoulder-and-hand-problems-and-conditions/ganglion-cyst/

---

Ganglion cyst
Ganglion cysts are fluid-filled lumps that can change in size. The most common type of swelling is in the hand, wrist or foot.
They tend to be smooth and round. They are usually harmless and can safely be left alone.
If you still have concerns about any lump or swelling you should contact your GP practice.
Symptoms of ganglion cysts
If you have a ganglion cyst the swelling can become noticeable, but often there are no other symptoms.
Sometimes a ganglion can cause pain and limit movement in your joint. The pain is usually caused by pressure being applied to the ganglion. Some people are also concerned about the cyst’s appearance.
Most symptoms settle with time.
Diagnosing ganglion cysts
Ganglion cysts have a very distinct appearance.
Ganglion cyst on the back of the wrist
Ganglion cyst on the front of the wrist
Ganglion cyst on the ankle
These cysts are normally harmless and don’t usually need any treatment.
Contact your GP if:
the ganglion:
continues to increase in size
restricts function
becomes hard
becomes irregular in shape
becomes painful
Giving a diagnosis is usually straightforward. Scans are rarely needed but can be helpful if the diagnosis is uncertain.
Causes of ganglion cysts
A ganglion cyst starts when the fluid from a joint or tendon collects and forms a jelly-filled sac beneath the skin.
It’s not known why this happens but they can be common.
Types of ganglion cysts
Ganglion cysts can form:
at the back of the wrist – these often disappear without treatment
at the front of the wrist
at the base of the finger – these tend to be firmer, and pea-like in shape
at the top of the foot
Treating ganglion cysts
Most ganglion cysts disappear on their own, without treatment. In the early stages, you should wait to see if this happens.
Pain may be related to the pressure being applied to the ganglion. You could adapt your hand position for activities to see if that helps. It’s important to use your hand or foot as normally as you can to avoid the area getting stiff or weak.
Aspiration
Your healthcare professional may consider aspiration of the ganglion cyst, if appropriate.
It’s a procedure where they will remove fluid from the ganglion with a needle and syringe.
Surgery
You may be referred for surgery if the ganglion is causing significant pain or affects function. The surgery may be carried out under either
local or general anaesthetic
.
As with any surgery there are associated risks. Your healthcare professional will discuss these with you.
After any treatment, there’s a possibility the ganglion may come back.
Source:
The NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group