Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/generalised-anxiety-disorder-gad/

---

Anxiety is a feeling of unease, like worry or fear, that can be mild or severe. It’s the main symptom of several conditions, including:
panic disorder
phobias
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
social anxiety disorder (social phobia)
This page is about a specific condition called generalised anxiety disorder (GAD).
What is generalised anxiety disorder?
Generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) is a long-term condition. It causes you to feel anxious about a wide range of issues, rather than 1 specific event.
People with GAD feel anxious most days. They often struggle to remember the last time they felt relaxed. As soon as 1 anxious thought leaves, another may appear about a different issue.
Everyone has feelings of anxiety at some point in their life. For example, you may feel worried and anxious about sitting an exam, or having a job interview. During times like these, feeling anxious can be perfectly normal.
But some people find it hard to control their worries. Their feelings of anxiety are more constant and often affect their daily lives.
Symptoms of generalised anxiety disorder
GAD can cause a change in your behaviour and the way you think and feel about things. It can also cause physical changes. This results in symptoms like:
restlessness
a sense of dread
feeling constantly “on edge”
difficulty concentrating
irritability
dizziness
tiredness
a noticeably strong, fast or irregular heartbeat (
palpitations
)
muscle aches and tension
trembling or shaking
dry mouth
excessive sweating
shortness of breath
stomach ache
feeling sick
headache
pins and needles
difficulty falling or staying asleep (
insomnia
)
Your symptoms may cause you to withdraw from social contact to avoid feelings of worry and dread.
You may also find going to work difficult and stressful and may take time off sick. This can make you worry even more about yourself and increase your lack of self-esteem.
Contact your GP practice if:
your mental health is affecting your daily life
you’re not looking after yourself
you’re finding it hard to manage any responsibilities you have
Find out how to get urgent help for your mental health
This video requires YouTube cookies.
Update your consent
.
Watch more videos of people talking about how they cope with anxiety
Anxiety triggers
If you’re anxious as a result of a specific phobia or because of
panic disorder
, you’ll usually know what the cause is. For example, if you have claustrophobia (a fear of enclosed spaces), you know that being confined in a small space will trigger your anxiety.
However, if you have GAD, it may not always be clear what you’re feeling anxious about. Not knowing what triggers your anxiety can make it worse. You may start to worry that there’ll be no solution.
What causes generalised anxiety disorder?
The exact cause of GAD is not fully understood. It’s likely that a combination of several factors plays a role, like:
overactivity in areas of the brain involved in emotions and behaviour
an imbalance of the brain chemicals serotonin and noradrenaline, which are involved in the control and regulation of mood
the genes you inherit from your parents – you’re more likely to develop GAD if a close relative has it
having a history of stressful or traumatic experiences, like domestic violence, child abuse or bullying
having a painful long-term health condition, like
arthritis
having a history of drug or alcohol misuse
However, many people develop GAD for no obvious reason.
Treatment for generalised anxiety disorder
GAD can have a significant effect on your daily life. There are several different treatments available that can help. These include:
talking therapies – like
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
medication – like a type of antidepressant called
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
There are also many things you can do yourself to help reduce your anxiety, like:
trying a self-help course
exercising regularly
stopping smoking
cutting down on
alcohol
drinking less caffeine
With treatment, many people are able to control their levels of anxiety. Some treatments may need to be continued for a long time. There may be periods where your symptoms worsen.
Self help for anxiety
Our mental health self-help guides are based on
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
. They’ve proven highly successful in helping people with anxiety and other mental health issues.
Start the anxiety self help guide
Daylight
Daylight is a digital programme to improve anxiety based on Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT). It’s clinically proven to help people improve their anxiety symptoms by using it for just a few minutes each day.
You can use Daylight via the app for iOS and Android devices.
Sign up for Daylight
Contact support groups
Support groups can give you useful advice about how to manage your anxiety. They’re also a good way to meet other people with similar experiences.
Examples of support groups you may find useful include:
Anxiety UK
Mind
Rethink Mental Illness
Support groups can often arrange face-to-face meetings, where you can talk about your feelings with other people. Many support groups also provide support and guidance online, over the phone or in writing.
Ask your GP about local support groups for anxiety in your area. Or search
Scotland Service Directory for mental health information
and support services near you.
Referral to a specialist
If treatments you’ve tried aren’t helping, you may want to discuss with your GP whether you should be referred to a mental health specialist.
You’ll usually be referred to your community mental health team. These teams include a range of specialists, including:
psychiatrists
psychiatric nurses
clinical psychologists
occupational therapists
social workers
A mental health specialist will carry out a reassessment of your condition. They’ll ask you about your previous treatment and how effective you found it.
Your specialist will then be able to devise a treatment plan for you.
As part of this plan, you may be offered a treatment you’ve not tried before. Or you may be offered a combination of a
psychological treatment
with medication.
Source:
NHS 24