Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/sexual-and-reproductive/genital-warts/

---

Genital warts
Genital warts are a common sexually transmitted infection (STI).
They are caused by a virus called Human Papilloma Virus (HPV).
Symptoms of genital warts
It can take a few weeks or months for genital warts to appear after becoming infected.
Genital warts are usually small, rough lumps on the skin.
They can appear:
around the vagina and on the penis
around the anus
on the skin between the genitals and the anus
Genital warts may:
appear on their own or in a group (groups of warts can look like a cauliflower)
feel soft or firm
be white, red, skin-coloured, or darker than the surrounding skin
They don’t usually cause symptoms but can sometimes be painful, itchy or bleed.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice or local sexual health clinic if you have:
1 or more painless lumps or growths around your vagina, penis or anus
itching or bleeding from your genitals or anus
a sexual partner (s) who has genital warts
Testing for genital warts
The test for genital warts involves an examination of the genital area.
If you think you might have genital warts, get checked for free by:
contacting your GP practice for an appointment
booking an appointment at your local sexual health service
Warts must be diagnosed by a doctor or nurse.
Treatment for genital warts
Treatment for genital warts is not always needed. They sometimes disappear on their own within 6 months.
If treatment is recommended, it’ll be prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor or nurse may advise you to avoid sex while you’re having treatment for genital warts.
The type of treatment you’ll be offered depends on what your warts are like. Your doctor or nurse will discuss this with you.
Treatment options include:
cream or liquid
freezing
surgery
Cream or liquid
You can usually apply this to the warts yourself a few times a week for several weeks.
Freezing
A doctor or nurse freezes the warts with liquid nitrogen, usually every week for 4 weeks.
Surgery
A doctor or nurse can cut or burn the warts off. This is usually only recommended if the warts are not responding or are too large for cream or freezing. Side effects of these treatments include:
bleeding
wound infection
scarring
Genital warts and pregnancy
Genital warts are not usually harmful during pregnancy.
During pregnancy, genital warts may:
multiply and get bigger (they may be removed if they’re very big)
become more easily irritated
be passed on to the baby during childbirth, but this is very rare (the HPV virus can cause infection in the baby’s throat or genitals)
Most creams, liquids and ointments used to treat genital warts are not recommended during pregnancy. Freezing can be used but it’s often not very successful.
Genital warts usually disappear on their own within 6 weeks after childbirth.
How genital warts are passed on
You can get genital warts from skin to skin contact.
Other ways of getting genital warts include:
unprotected vaginal, anal, or oral sex (sex without a condom)
sharing sex toys with an infected person
How to prevent genital warts
The best way to reduce your risk of STIs is to practice
safer sex
. This means using a condom for vaginal, anal, and oral sex, and when sharing sex toys.
You can get warts even if you use condoms, as a condom does not cover the whole genital area.
The
HPV vaccination
will reduce your risk of getting HPV virus which causes warts. However, it doesn’t treat warts once you have them.
HPV and cancer
Genital warts are not cancer and don’t cause cancer. They’re caused by a different strain of HPV.
HPV vaccination
is offered to every person aged 11 to 13. The vaccine can protect against cervical cancer also protects against genital warts.
The HPV vaccine is
also offered to men who have sex with men (MSM) and trans people aged up to 45 years
.
If you didn’t have the vaccine at school and don’t fulfill the above criteria, you can pay for the vaccine privately.
Other STIs
If you’ve been diagnosed with genital warts it’s recommended that you’re tested for all STIs including:
chlamydia
gonorrhoea
syphilis
HIV
Source:
Scottish Government