Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/glandular-fever/

---

Glandular fever
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Glandular fever is a type of viral infection that mostly affects young adults. It normally gets better without treatment, but it can make you feel very ill. It normally lasts for 2 to 3 weeks, but in some cases you can feel ill for months.
It can also be known as infectious mononucleosis, or ‘mono’.
Symptoms of glandular fever
Glandular fever is most common in 15 to 24 year olds.
Common symptoms include:
a high temperature (fever)
a very sore throat
swollen glands
in the neck
fatigue (extreme tiredness)
headache
Other symptoms of glandular fever
Other symptoms include:
feeling generally unwell
aching muscles
chills
sweating a lot
loss of appetite
pain around or behind your eyes
swollen tonsils and adenoids (small lumps of tissue at the back of the nose), which may affect your breathing
a very red throat that oozes fluid
small red or purple spots on the roof of your mouth
a rash
swelling or ‘puffiness’ around your eyes
a tender or swollen tummy
jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes)
Phone 999 immediately if you:
develop a rasping breath (stridor) or have severe difficulty breathing
can’t swallow, including your own saliva
develop intense stomach pain
Phone your GP practice or phone 111 immediately if you have:
difficulty breathing or being more short of breath than normal
difficulty swallowing
Phone your GP practice if you have:
a very high temperature or you feel hot and shivery
a severe sore throat
swelling either side of your neck (swollen glands)
extreme tiredness or exhaustion
a sore throat that’s not getting better
Fever in adults self-help guide
Complete this guide to assess your symptoms and find out more about where to get help.
Diagnosing glandular fever
To diagnose glandular fever, your GP will first ask about your symptoms. They will carry out a physical examination. They’ll look for signs of glandular fever, like swollen glands, tonsils, liver and spleen.
Your GP may also recommend a
blood test
to help confirm the diagnosis and rule out infections that can cause similar symptoms.
Treatment for glandular fever
Glandular fever will normally get better on its own. But there are things you can do help ease the symptoms while you wait for your body to control the infection.
Do
drink plenty of fluids
take over-the-counter painkillers, like
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
get plenty of rest
Occasionally,
antibiotics
or
corticosteroids
may be prescribed if you develop complications of glandular fever.
Some people with particularly severe symptoms may need to be looked after in hospital for a few days.
What causes glandular fever?
Glandular fever is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). This virus is found in the saliva of infected people and can be spread through:
kissing
exposure to coughs and sneezes
sharing cups, glasses and unwashed cutlery
sharing toothbrushes
EBV may be found in the saliva of someone who has had glandular fever several months after their symptoms pass. Some people may continue to have the virus in their saliva on and off for years.
How to prevent the spread of glandular fever
You’re infectious for up to 7 weeks before you get symptoms, and you may be infectious for several months after being unwell.
To help stop you spreading glandular fever when you’re infected:
Do
wash your hands regularly
wash anything that may have your saliva on it
Don’t
do not kiss others
do not share anything that you put in or near your mouth
do not give blood while you have glandular fever
Complications of glandular fever
Complications linked with glandular fever are uncommon. If they they do occur they can be serious. They can include:
liver conditions like hepatitis
kidney conditions
heart problems like
inflammation of the heart
blood conditions like
sepsis
a ruptured (burst) spleen, which may need to be treated with surgery
long-term tiredness or fatigue
Source:
NHS 24