Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/cancer/side-effects/hair-loss-and-cancer/

---

Hair loss and cancer
Some cancer treatments can cause hair loss. Your doctor will be able to talk to you about your situation. Some people find the condition and growth of their hair changes. Others find their hair falls out completely.
Different treatments will affect your hair differently.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy can cause your hair to fall out, but not all chemotherapy drugs make your hair fall out. It will usually happen within 2 to 3 weeks of starting treatment. Some chemotherapy drugs can make other hair from your body fall out, such as facial hair and pubic hair. Hair usually grows back after treatment finishes.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy can cause your hair to fall out, but only in the area being treated. If you are having radiotherapy to your head, you’ll probably lose hair from your scalp. Hair does not always grow back after radiotherapy. Your doctor will talk to you about this.
Other treatments
Other cancer treatments, such as hormonal therapy or targeted (biological) therapy, can cause changes to your hair.
It can help to know more about how treatment could affect your hair. Your doctor or nurse will be able to answer any questions.
Preventing hair loss
Scalp cooling can reduce hair loss caused by chemotherapy. It works by reducing the amount of chemotherapy drugs reaching the hair follicles. Scalp cooling doesn’t work with all chemotherapy drugs and it’s not always possible to know how effective the treatment will be.
You will need to keep your head cold before, during and after treatment. There are 2 methods of scalp cooling:
cold cap – a special cap filled with cold gel
refrigerated cooling system – this pumps liquid coolant through a cap
You might feel cold during your treatment, but the chemotherapy staff will try to make you as comfortable as possible. Your hospital may not have the facilities for scalp cooling. Your doctor or nurse can tell you if it’s available and whether it’s suitable for you.
If you don’t lose all your hair, but it thins or becomes dry or brittle, it’s important to treat your hair carefully. This can help to reduce hair loss.
Tips to help you care for your hair and skin during and after treatment
It’s important to look after your hair and skin during and after cancer treatment.
To look after your hair:
wash it at least once every 2 days
use gentle hair products
check with your radiotherapy team if you can use products on the affected area
only use conditioner on the middle and ends of long hair
blot wet hair with a towel and use a wide-toothed comb
wear a soft cap or turban at night
eat a balanced diet
avoid using hairdryers, straighteners or hot rollers
avoid colouring, perming or relaxing
try not to tie your hair in a tight band
if you lose your hair, it’s important to look after the skin on your head and in other places where you had hair
To look after your skin:
shampoo your scalp every day
use an unperfumed moisturiser
use pillows made from natural fibres
protect your head from the sun and from the cold
Avoid using deodorants, soaps, perfumes and lotions if you’re having radiotherapy. Check which products you can use with your radiotherapy team.
Tips to help you prepare for losing your hair
If it’s likely you will lose your hair during cancer treatment, there are ways you can prepare:
eat a well-balanced diet before treatment starts to help your body cope better
talk to friends and family about losing your hair
buy a hat or other headwear to protect your head
talk to other people who have hair loss to share tips on how to cope
if you decide to wear a wig, buy one before treatment starts – it’ll be easier to match it to your colour and style, and you can get used to wearing it
buy products to help you cope with losing your eyebrows and eyelashes
You could also consider cutting your hair short:
you may find it easier to cut it in stages
don’t use a blade to shave your head
it’s best to cut clean dry hair
you could ask a salon that specialises in styling people affected by cancer to cut your hair
What are my options?
There are many ways to cover up hair loss. Hats, scarves and turbans are popular options for men and women.
hats – there are many styles to choose from
scarves – versatile with many colour and fabric options, lightweight materials such as cotton are best
turbans – easy to wear and widely available
wigs – you can continue with a familiar style or try something new
Some hats, headbands or bandanas have optional fringe or hair attachments. If you still have some hair, changing your hairstyle can help cover up hair loss. Specialist hairdressers like
mynewhair
can offer advice.
In certain situations surgery to replace hair (hair transplant) might be an option if your hair loss is permanent. This treatment is not available through the NHS.
You may not want to wear anything on your head. Accessories, clothing and makeup can express your style and draw attention away from hair loss.
After treatment
As your hair grows back after treatment, you may find that it has changed.
Hair usually grows back after chemotherapy. It may be curlier, finer or a different colour. You might find that it grows unevenly or in patches. These changes are rarely permanent.
Hair re-growth after radiotherapy depends on the type and number of treatments you had, and the area of the body that was affected. If your hair grows back, it usually starts 3 to 6 months after treatment. It may be patchy, thinner or a different colour.
Sometimes hair loss can be permanent. If you have hair loss on your head, you may want to wear a wig, hairpiece or another type of headwear.
As your hair grows back:
use shampoos and products if they do not irritate your scalp
when your hair is long enough to style, you may decide not to cover your head
choose a hairdresser who understands your situation – if your hair is finer, you could ask them about using hair extensions
you may be able to colour or perm your hair – seek professional advice before doing this
Further information on hair loss
Source:
Macmillan Cancer Support