Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/immune-system/hay-fever/

---

Hay fever
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Hay fever is a common allergic condition. You’ll experience hay fever symptoms if you have an allergic reaction to pollen which is released by plants.
Hay fever self-help guide
Advice for people aged 5 years or more with the symptoms of hay fever.
Complete the hay fever self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Symptoms of hay fever
The symptoms of hay fever include:
frequent sneezing
runny or blocked nose
itchy, red or watery eyes (allergic
conjunctivitis
)
an itchy throat, mouth, nose and ears
cough
– this is caused by postnasal drip (mucus dripping down the throat from the back of the nose)
Other symptoms of hay fever are less common. This includes:
the loss of your sense of smell (anosmia)
facial pain – this is caused by blocked sinuses)
headaches
earache
tiredness and fatigue
If you have
asthma
, your asthma symptoms may get worse when you have hay fever.
Treatment for hay fever
There’s currently no cure for hay fever but most people can relieve symptoms with treatment.
Treatment options for hay fever include:
antihistamines – which help to prevent an allergic reaction
corticosteroids (steroids)
– which help to reduce inflammation and swelling
Many hay fever medications are available over-the-counter.
Speak to your GP practice if:
Your hay fever symptoms:
are getting worse
do not improve after taking over-the-counter medicines
How to prevent hay fever symptoms
There are some steps you can take to prevent hay fever symptoms.
Do
wear wraparound sunglasses – this can stop pollen getting in your eyes when you’re outdoors
take a shower and change your clothes after being outdoors – to remove pollen on your body
stay indoors when the pollen count is high
apply a small amount of Vaseline (petroleum gel) to the nostrils to trap pollen
keep windows and doors shut as much as possible
wipe surfaces in your house regularly with a damp cloth
try to spend time outdoors when pollen levels are lower
Don’t
do not keep fresh flowers in your house
do not smoke or be around smoke – it can make your symptoms worse
do not dry clothes outside when pollen counts are high
Check the pollen forecast
You may find it helpful to check the pollen forecast in your area. This can help you plan your day-to-day activities, and when to take your hay fever treatments.
The Met Office have advice on
the latest pollen forecasts
.
What causes hay fever?
Hay fever is caused by an allergic reaction to pollen.
Pollen is a fine powder released by plants as part of their reproductive cycle. It contains proteins that can cause the nose, eyes, throat and sinuses to become swollen, irritated and inflamed.
You can have an allergy to:
tree pollen – released during spring
grass pollen – released at the end of spring and the beginning of summer
weed pollen – released in late autumn
Who’s most at risk of hay fever?
Anyone can get hay fever. It usually begins in childhood or during your teenage years.
You’re more likely to develop hay fever if you have a family history of
allergies
, particularly
asthma
or
eczema
.
Many people find their symptoms improve as they get older.
Complications of hay fever
Hay fever can sometimes affect your quality of life. For example, very severe hay fever may disrupt your productivity at school or work.
Inflammation of the sinuses (
sinusitis
) is a common complication of hay fever. Children may also develop a
middle ear infection (otitis media)
as a result of hay fever.
If you’re worried about these conditions, speak to your GP practice.
Source:
NHS 24