Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/cardiovascular-disease/heart-disease/heart-block/

---

Heart block
Electrical impulses control the beating of the heart muscle. Heart block can happen when the electrical impulses get interrupted.
Symptoms of heart block
There are a few different types of heart block. Your symptoms will depend on which type of heart block you have.
First degree heart block
A first degree heart block is when there’s a very short delay in the heart’s electrical impulse.
First degree heart block does not usually cause any noticeable symptoms. Most people only become aware of it when they’re tested for another medical condition.
Second degree heart block
There are 2 types of second degree heart block, called Mobitz type 1 and Mobitz type 2.
Mobitz type 1 causes a series of increasing delays in the heart’s electrical impulses until the heart eventually skips a beat. This is the less serious type of second degree heart block, and most people will not have any symptoms. However, it can sometimes cause dizziness and fainting.
Mobitz type 2 causes irregular delays in the heart’s electrical impulses, which means the heart skips a beat more often. Mobitz type 2 is more likely to cause symptoms like:
dizziness
light-headedness
fainting or collapse
chest pain
– which may be worse during physical activity like climbing the stairs
breathlessness
getting tired easily when doing physical activity
Third degree heart block
A third degree heart block is also known as complete heart block. This is when electrical impulses are not sent between the chambers of the heart.
Third degree heart block can be:
congenital – the condition is there from birth
acquired – the condition develops as a result of ageing or damage to the heart
Symptoms of a third degree heart block include:
fainting or collapse
light-headedness
dizziness
breathlessness
extreme tiredness, sometimes with confusion
chest pain
fatigue
slow heart beat (bradycardia)
Phone 999 immediately if:
You or someone else has symptoms like:
central chest pain or discomfort in the chest that doesn’t go away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
pain that radiates down the left arm, or both arms, or to the neck, jaw, back or stomach
unconsciousness
seizures or fitting
difficulty breathing (snoring or rasping)
rapid heart beat
low or undetectable heart beat
chest pain and breathlessness, nausea, sweating or coughing up blood
Bundle branch block
Bundle branch block is when electrical impulses travel more slowly through the heart than normal. This happens when there’s a block in the path that the electrical impulses usually follow.
There are 2 types of bundle branch block. These are:
left bundle branch block
–
electrical impulses to the left side of the heart get delayed or blocked
right bundle branch block
–
electrical impulses to the right side of the heart get delayed or blocked
Bundle branch block doesn’t usually cause any symptoms.
Diagnosing heart block
Unless you have symptoms, heart block is usually diagnosed during testing for another condition.
If you do need to have tests for heart block, an
electrocardiogram (ECG)
is usually used. An ECG helps to show how well your heart is working. Sometimes you may also be given a portable heart rhythm monitor to check the electrical activity of your heart over a longer period of time.
If a child has a congenital heart block, this may be found during pregnancy using an
ultrasound scan
. The scanner can be used to measure how quickly your baby’s heart is beating. An abnormally slow heartbeat may suggest a heart block.
Treatment for heart block
Treatment for heart block will usually depend on what type of heart block you have.
First degree heart block and Mobitz type 1 don’t usually need treatment. Third degree (complete) heart block and Mobitz type 2 and are usually treated with a
pacemaker
.
A pacemaker is a small metal box that’s inserted under the skin. It’s attached to one or more wires that run to your heart. The pacemaker sends regular impulses to the heart to keep it beating regularly.
In emergency situations, you may be given medication to speed up your heart beat. A temporary pacemaker can also help stabilise you before you’re given a permanent pacemaker.
What causes heart block?
Most people with heart block develop it later in life, or as a result of another condition. This is known as acquired heart block.
Acquired heart block can be caused by:
ageing of the electrical pathways in your heart
other heart conditions like a
heart attack
some prescription medicines
heart surgery
other conditions like
Lyme disease
Other people are born with heart block. This is known as congenital heart block. Babies are more likely to have congenital heart block if they’re born with a heart defect or their mother has an autoimmune condition like
Lupus.
Living with heart block
If you or someone you know has been diagnosed with heart block, support is available.
The
British Heart Foundation’s Heart Helpline
can help with any questions or worries you have about heart or circulatory issues. Phone the helpline on 0808 802 1234 (Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm) for advice.
Information and support for people living with a heart condition is also available through:
The British Heart Foundation
Chest, Heart & Stroke Scotland
Get more information and advice on cardiovascular conditions
Source:
Scottish Government