Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/a-z/heatstroke-and-heat-illness/

---

Heatstroke and heat illness
Heat illness such as heatstroke happens in hot places, both indoors and outdoors. It can be caused by being active in a place that’s too hot.
Heat illness can range from mild to severe, and heat exhaustion and heatstroke are the most serious types.
Heat exhaustion can usually be managed with first aid. If you aren’t able to cool down, it can become heatstroke. This is a potentially life threatening condition.
Symptoms of heat exhaustion
Symptoms of heat exhaustion include:
tiredness
weakness
feeling faint
headache
muscle cramps
feeling or being sick
heavy sweating
feeling very thirsty
heat rash
The symptoms of heat exhaustion are usually the same in adults and children. Children might also behave strangely.
Phone 111 if:
You or someone else:
has symptoms of heat exhaustion that you’re struggling to treat or that you need advice on
Symptoms of heatstroke
Heatstroke symptoms can include:
high body temperature or fever – usually more than 40 degrees Celsius
fainting or losing consciousness
a seizure or fit
severe difficulty breathing – for example, struggling to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
confusion
lack of coordination
skin that’s cold to the touch, even with a high body temperature
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
You or someone else:
has symptoms of heatstroke
still feel unwell after 30 minutes of resting in a cool place, being cooled down, and drinking fluids
If someone loses consciousness while you’re waiting for help, put them in the
recovery position
.
How to cool down
If someone shows symptoms of heat illness, they need to be cooled down as soon as possible.
To cool down, you should:
Move to a cooler place, like a shaded room indoors.
Remove any unnecessary clothing or accessories, including jackets and socks.
Drink fluids like water or a rehydration drink. Foods with a high water content like an ice lolly can be helpful. Salty foods can also help to replace the salt lost through sweating.
Apply cool water to exposed skin using a spray or sponge and fan them quickly.
First aid treatment for heat illness
Laura’s story will give you information on the symptoms of heat exhaustion. It also explains what to do when you notice someone might be suffering from the heat.
Treatment for heat illness
You should follow the first aid advice above if someone has signs of heatstroke.
To treat heatstroke, healthcare professionals will try to cool your body down. They may also give you fluids through a vein.
How long does heat illness last?
How long heat illness lasts will vary from person to person.
Heat exhaustion will usually get better 30 to 60 minutes after you’re cooled down. However, you may continue to feel unwell or tired for up to 24 hours. Your symptoms shouldn’t get worse during this time.
If you have heatstroke, you’ll be treated in hospital. It can take a few days to recover from this.
What causes heat illness?
Heat exhaustion and heatstroke can happen when you’re exposed to high temperatures. For example, if you exercise in hot places or spend a lot of time outside in the heat.
Who’s most at risk of heat illness?
Everyone is at risk during hot weather, but some groups of people are at higher risk of becoming unwell. This includes:
older people
babies
young children
people with long-term health conditions like
diabetes
or
heart problems
How to prevent heat illness
There are steps you can take to keep cool in the heat.
Do
drink plenty of cool fluids to stay hydrated – don’t wait to get thirsty
eat cold foods with high water content like salads and fruit
have a cool shower, bath, or wash
sprinkle cool water over your skin or clothing
keep a damp cloth on the back of your neck
take care drinking alcohol – it can leave you dehydrated
cool your home – close windows and curtains in rooms that face the sun
plan activities like dog walking for cooler times of the day like morning or evening
cover up with a long-sleeved shirt when the sun is at its hottest (11am to 3pm)
stay out of the sun when it’s at its hottest
wear a hat with a brim or flap that protects the ears and neck
wear loose-fitting clothing when it’s warm
Don’t
do not do tiring physical activity, like running, in very hot or humid weather
Find out more about how to stay safe in hot weather
Source:
NHS 24