Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/stomach-liver-and-gastrointestinal-tract/hepatitis-a/

---

Hepatitis A
Hepatitis A is a liver infection that’s spread in the poo of an infected person. The chance of getting it in the UK is low.
Hepatitis A is not usually serious. Most people get better within a couple of months.
A hepatitis A vaccine is available on the NHS if you’re at increased risk.
Symptoms of hepatitis A
Some people with hepatitis A, particularly young children, won’t have any symptoms.
If you do develop symptoms, they tend to occur around 4 weeks after exposure to the hepatitis A virus.
Symptoms of hepatitis A include:
feeling tired and generally unwell
joint and muscle pain
a high temperature (fever)
loss of appetite
feeling or being sick
pain in the upper-right part of your tummy
a
headache
,
sore throat
and
cough
constipation
or
diarrhoea
a raised, itchy rash (hives)
yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice)
dark pee
pale poo
itchy skin
the upper-right part of your tummy becoming swollen and tender
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
you think you may have been exposed to the hepatitis A virus – emergency treatment can help prevent infection if given within a few days of exposure
you have symptoms of hepatitis A
you’re at increased risk of hepatitis A
Diagnosing hepatitis A
A
blood test
can check whether you have hepatitis A. It can also rule out other conditions that cause similar symptoms, but which may require treatment to prevent more serious problems.
Your friends, family and sexual partners may need to be tested too.
Treatments for hepatitis A
There’s currently no cure for hepatitis A. It will usually get better its own within a couple of months.
Once hepatitis A passes, you’ll normally be immune to it for life.
Things you can do yourself
There are things you can do to help your symptoms and prevent the infection spreading to others.
Do
get plenty of rest
take painkillers such as
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
for any aches and pains – ask your GP for advice as you may need to take lower doses than normal or avoid certain medications until you’ve recovered
have a cool, airy environment
wear loose clothing
eat smaller, lighter meals to help reduce feeling sick and vomiting
wash your hands with soap and water regularly
wash soiled laundry separately on a hot cycle
clean the toilet, flush handles and taps more often than usual
Don’t
do not drink alcohol
do not have very hot baths or showers
do not prepare food for other people, if you can avoid it
do not share towels
do not go to work or school until at least a week after your jaundice or other symptoms started
do not have sex until at least a week after your jaundice or other symptoms started
Treatments from your doctor
Speak to your GP practice if your symptoms get worse or haven’t started to improve within a couple of months. They can prescribe medications to help with itchiness, nausea or vomiting, if needed.
Long-term hepatitis A
Hepatitis A can occasionally last for many months.
In rare cases, it can be life-threatening if it causes liver failure. People most at risk include those with other liver problems and elderly people. If liver failure does occur, a
liver transplant
is usually needed to treat it.
How is hepatitis A spread?
Hepatitis A is most widespread in parts of the world where standards of cleanliness and food hygiene are poor.
You can get the infection from:
drinking unclean water
eating food that’s been washed or grown in unclean water
eating food that’s been handled by an infected person
close contact with someone who has hepatitis A
having sex with someone who has the infection – particularly if you touch their anus with your fingers, mouth or tongue
injecting drugs using unclean equipment
Someone with hepatitis A is most infectious from around 2 weeks before their symptoms appear until about 1 week after the symptoms first develop.
The hepatitis A vaccine
Vaccination is the best way to prevent hepatitis A.
The hepatitis A vaccine isn’t routinely offered in the UK because the risk of infection is low for most people.
It’s only recommended for people at increased risk, including:
close contacts of someone with hepatitis A
people planning to travel to or live in parts of the world where
hepatitis A
is widespread, particularly if levels of cleanliness and food hygiene are expected to be poor
people with any type of long-term (chronic)
liver disease
men who have sex with other men
people who inject illegal drugs
people who may be exposed to hepatitis A through their job – for example sewage workers, staff at homeless shelters, and people working with monkeys, apes and gorillas
Source:
NHS Greater Glasgow & Clyde