Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/stomach-liver-and-gastrointestinal-tract/hepatitis-c/

---

Hepatitis C
Hepatitis C is a liver infection that’s spread through blood.
It can be cured with treatment. But if left untreated, it can sometimes cause serious and potentially life-threatening damage to the liver over many years.
Symptoms of hepatitis C
Many people with hepatitis C won’t have any symptoms until the liver has been significantly damaged. This means many people have the infection without knowing.
Early symptoms (acute hepatitis C)
Most people will not have symptoms during the first 6 months of a hepatitis C infection. This stage is known as acute hepatitis C.
If symptoms do develop, they usually occur a few weeks after infection.
Early symptoms may include:
a high temperature (fever) of 38°C (100.4°F) or above
tiredness
loss of appetite
abdominal pain
feeling and being sick
yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice)
Later symptoms (chronic hepatitis C)
Symptoms can vary from person to person. They can also go away for long periods of time and then return.
Later symptoms may include:
feeling tired all the time
joint and muscle aches and pain
feeling sick
brain fog – including problems with memory, concentration and mental tasks such as arithmetic
mood swings
depression
or anxiety
indigestion
or bloating
itchy skin
abdominal pain
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
you have symptoms of hepatitis C
there’s a risk you’re infected with hepatitis C, even if you don’t have symptoms
The only way to know for certain if these symptoms are caused by hepatitis C is to get tested.
Getting tested for hepatitis C
You can get tested for hepatitis C at:
your GP practice
a sexual health clinic
a drug treatment service
most substance use recovery services
Treatments for hepatitis C
Treatment takes 8 to 12 weeks, and usually cures the infection. But you won’t be immune to hepatitis C. So you should take steps to reduce your risk of becoming infected again.
If the infection is diagnosed early (acute hepatitis), you may not need treatment straight away. Instead, you may have another blood test after a few months to see if your body fights off the virus itself.
If the infection continues for several months (chronic hepatitis), treatment will usually be recommended.
Things you can do yourself
There are things you can do to stop liver damage and prevent the infection spreading to others before you start treatment.
Do
eat a
healthy and balanced diet
exercise regularly
speak to your doctor if you’re thinking of having a baby
Don’t
do not drink alcohol
do not smoke
do not share toothbrushes, razors, needles or other injecting equipment with other people
How is hepatitis C spread?
You can become infected with hepatitis C if you come into contact with the blood of an infected person.
Some ways the infection can be spread include:
injecting drugs and sharing needles and other drug equipment, such as spoons and filters
sharing toothbrushes, razors or scissors contaminated with infected blood
from a pregnant woman to her unborn baby
having sex with an infected person without using a condom – if your partner has hepatitis C, you should be tested
having a tattoo, body piercing, or medical or dental treatment with unsterilised equipment
if you had a blood transfusion in Scotland before 1996, you may have been exposed to hepatitis C – all donor blood in Scotland has been screened for hepatitis C since September 1991, however there is an extremely small possibility that some infections may have occurred from blood transfusions after universal screening was introduced but before a reporting system for transfusion risks began in 1996
How to prevent hepatitis C
There’s no vaccine for hepatitis C.
There are things you can do to reduce your risk of becoming infected.
Do
use
condoms
when having anal sex, or sex with a new partner
get vaccinated against
hepatitis A
and
hepatitis B
if you inject drugs, use a fresh safe injecting kit (available from needle exchanges) every time you inject
Don’t
do not share any drug-injecting equipment – including needles, syringes, spoons and filters
do not share razors or toothbrushes
The risk of getting hepatitis C through vaginal sex is very low. It may be higher if blood is present, such as period (menstrual) blood or from bleeding during anal sex.
Complications of hepatitis C
If left untreated for many years, hepatitis C can cause liver damage (
cirrhosis
). In severe cases, life-threatening problems such as liver failure or
liver cancer
can eventually develop.
Early treatment of hepatitis C prevents these serious complications, while later treatment reduces the risk.
Source:
NHS Greater Glasgow & Clyde