Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/cardiovascular-disease/risk-factors-for-cardiovascular-disease/high-cholesterol/

---

High cholesterol
Cholesterol is a fatty substance that’s produced in the liver. It’s also in some foods that we eat. The body needs a certain amount of cholesterol to function normally.
Cholesterol combines with proteins to be carried around the blood. This combination is known as lipoproteins.
There are 2 main types of lipoprotein.
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) carries cholesterol away from the cells and back to the liver to be removed. For this reason, HDL is referred to as ‘good cholesterol’ and higher levels of this type are better.
Non-HDL lipoproteins are known as ‘bad cholesterol’. This is because it can build up in blood vessel walls if there’s too much.
Effects of high cholesterol
Non-HDL lipoproteins can build up in blood vessel walls and cause
atherosclerosis
. This is a gradual build up of fatty substances that causes a narrowing of the arteries. This affects blood flow and can lead to:
heart disease
strokes
peripheral arterial disease (PAD)
Other risk factors for cardiovascular disease include
high blood pressure.
What are healthy cholesterol levels?
This information is just a guide to healthy cholesterol levels. What matters is your overall risk of cardiovascular disease. This is assessed by considering your cholesterol levels alongside other things like:
your age
whether you
smoke
whether you have
high blood pressure
if you have a family history of
cardiovascular disease
Blood cholesterol is measured in units called millimoles per litre of blood. This is often shortened to mmol/L.
A healthy level of:
total cholesterol – is below 5mmol/L
HDL (good cholesterol) – is above 1.0mmol/L for men or above 1.2mmol/L for women
non-HDL (bad cholesterol) – is below 4mmol/L
You should speak to your healthcare professional if you’re worried about your cholesterol level.
Causes of high cholesterol
There are many things that can influence your chance of developing high cholesterol. Some of these you have control over and some of these you don’t.
For example, the chance of developing high cholesterol is increased by certain lifestyle factors. These are sometimes called controllable risk factors. This includes your diet, level of physical activity and smoking habits.
Things that influence high cholesterol that you can’t change include:
age
being male
ethnicity
There’s also an inherited condition called
familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH)
. An inherited condition means that it can be passed through families by faulty genes. This can cause high cholesterol even in people who follow a healthy lifestyle.
Diagnosing high cholesterol
High cholesterol doesn’t usually cause any symptoms on its own. You can have your cholesterol levels checked.
Your healthcare professional may recommend that you get your cholesterol levels tested if they think you’re at risk of cardiovascular disease.
If you have high cholesterol, your healthcare professional will talk to you about how you can lower it. This might include things like changing your diet or taking medicine.
Managing your high cholesterol
Lifestyle changes can help to lower your cholesterol level, including:
eating a healthy, balanced diet
exercising regularly
stopping smoking
drinking less alcohol
The most common medications for high cholesterol are
statins
. But, there are some other types of medications available. Your healthcare professional will advise if you need these.
The British Heart Foundation has some
top tips on how to lower your cholesterol
.
Source:
Scottish Government