Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/hydrocephalus/

---

Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus is a condition that causes a build up of fluid in the brain. The excess fluid affects the brain and how it functions.
Symptoms of hydrocephalus
The damage to the brain from hydrocephalus can cause symptoms like:
headache
nausea and vomiting (feeling and being sick)
blurred vision
drowsiness
difficulty walking
Hydrocephalus from birth
Babies born with hydrocephalus (known as congenital hydrocephalus) often have physical features like:
an unusually large head
a thin scalp with visible veins
a tense or bulging fontanelle (the soft spot on top of a baby’s head)
downward looking eyes
delayed development
Hydrocephalus from birth can also cause:
muscle stiffness and spasms in your baby’s lower limbs
poor feeding
irritability
vomiting (being sick)
sleepiness
Hydrocephalus that develops in children or adults
Hydrocephalus that develops in children or adults (acquired hydrocephalus) can cause:
headaches that are often worse in the morning or wake you from sleep
sleepiness
confusion
blurred vision or double vision
neck pain
nausea (feeling sick)
vomiting (being sick)
difficulty walking
urinary incontinence
(loss of bladder control)
memory issues
balance problems
Phone 999 or go to an emergency department if:
you or your child has symptoms of hydrocephalus that have developed very suddenly or rapidly
Phone your GP practice if:
you think you or your child might have symptoms of hydrocephalus
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) tends to develop slowly over many months or years. It’s more common in older people.
NPH can affect:
how you walk (mobility)
your urinary system
your mental abilities
How you walk
If you have NPH you might find it difficult to take the first step when you walk. Some people with NPH describe it as feeling like they’re frozen on the spot.
NPH can also cause you to shuffle rather than take proper steps.
As NPH progresses, you might be more prone to falls and become increasingly unsteady on your feet. This might be worse when you’re turning.
Urinary symptoms
You might experience urinary incontinence if you have NPH. Symptoms can include:
a frequent need to pee
an urgent need to pee
loss of control of your bladder
Mental abilities
If you have NPH you might:
be slow to respond to questions
react slowly to situations
take longer to process information
difficulty remembering information
These symptoms may improve when NPH is treated.
Causes of hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus can be congenital (present from birth). This is called congenital hydrocephalus. It may be related to other health conditions, like spina bifida.
Hydrocephalus can happen when the normal pathways for brain fluid become blocked. This can be caused by bleeding in the brain or a tumor. This is called obstructive hydrocephalus.
Sometimes the normal pathways for brain fluid are narrower than they should be. This can cause triventricular hydrocephalus.
Hydrocephalus can also happen after bleeding or an infection in the brain. The bleeding or infection reduces the brain’s ability to absorb brain fluid. This problem continues even after the bleeding or infection has been resolved. This is called aresorbtive hydrocephalus.
Diagnosing hydrocephalus
Congenital hydrocephalus can sometimes be diagnosed during a regular pre-natal
ultrasound scan
. It can also be diagnosed during the
newborn physical examination
.
The other types of hydrocephalus will be diagnosed from a brain scan. This is normally a
CT scan
or an
MRI scan
.
Treating hydrocephalus
Surgery is necessary to treat hydrocephalus. You or your child may be offered temporary or permanent treatments, depending on your circumstances. The medical professionals treating you will fully explain your options.
Temporary treatment
Sometimes a baby with hydrocephalus cannot have permanent treatment. In these circumstances, you’ll be offered a temporary surgical solution.
In some cases, surgeons may insert an access device. This involves inserting a small port under the skin. Brain fluid can then be drained from this device using a needle.
Another option that may be recommended is a subgaleal shunt. This is where surgeons create a pocket under the skin. Brain fluid can then drain into this pocket.
Permanent treatment
Most hydrocephalus cases are treated through surgery to insert a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. This allows fluid to drain from the brain. The fluid normally drains into the abdomen (tummy), but can also drain into the chest cavity or heart.
If you have triventricular hydrocephalus, you may be offered an endoscopic third ventriculostomy. This surgery cuts a small hole in the skull and creates a new pathway for brain fluid to circulate.
The medical professionals looking after you will explain the procedure and answer any questions you may have.
After surgery, you or your child should be able to live a normal life without restrictions. Regular follow up appointments throughout your life are not normally necessary.
Shunt problems
If there are signs of a problem with the shunt a scan can help identify the problem.
Sometimes the shunt might not be in the best position and further surgery might be needed to reposition it. Your surgeon will discuss this with you.
After the shunt has been installed, further treatment for hydrocephalus may be needed if the shunt malfunctions or becomes infected. If this happens shunt repair surgery might be needed.
A shunt blockage can be very serious. It can lead to a build-up of excess fluid in the brain, which can cause brain damage. This will cause the symptoms of hydrocephalus.
Shunt infection can also happen after shunt surgery. Infections are more likely to develop during the first month after surgery.
Phone your surgical team immediately if you or your child shows symptoms of an infection like:
redness and tenderness along the line of the shunt or the wounds
a high temperature
headache
vomiting
neck stiffness
tummy pain caused by the shunt draining into your tummy
irritability or sleepiness in babies
If there is an infection, the shunt will have to be removed.
Antibiotics
will then be used to treat the infection. Once the infection is clear a new shunt can be fitted.
As most children have their shunt fitted when they’re so young, they may need further surgeries throughout their life.
There can occasionally be bleeding when a shunt is positioned. This can cause neurological problems. There’s also a small risk of fits after any type of brain surgery.
In younger children, particularly babies, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can run alongside the shunt rather than down it. This can cause the fluid to leak through the skin wound. Additional stitches or further surgery will be needed to stop the leak.
Shunt alert cards
Visit
Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus Scotland
for information about how to apply for a medical alert card. You carry the card with you if you’ve had a shunt fitted.
Complications of endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV)
An endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) is surgery to create a small hole in the third ventricle, an area of fluid within the brain. This creates an alternative pathway for the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to circulate.
Possible complications after ETV surgery include:
the hole can close
your brain may not be able to absorb the CSF that’s now draining through it
infection – although this is less likely than after shunt surgery
bleeding inside your brain
neurological damage like problems with short term memory, double vision or hormone imbalances
If there’s a problem with the hole, it may be possible to repeat the surgery, or you may need to have a shunt fitted.
Most nerve problems will get better, but there’s a small risk of permanent problems.
There’s also a small risk of epilepsy. There’s a very small risk of an injury to a blood vessel in the brain, which may be fatal.
Source:
Scottish Government