Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/a-z/hypothermia-low-body-temperature/

---

Hypothermia (low body temperature)
Hypothermia is when the body’s temperature drops below 35°C. Normal body temperature is 37°C. When your body temperature gets this low, less blood is circulated around your body and normal body functions start to slow down.
Hypothermia can happen both indoors and outdoors.
Hypothermia is a medical emergency and will get worse if left untreated. However mild hypothermia can be treated safely and effectively with the appropriate first aid.
Symptoms of hypothermia
Hypothermia ranges from mild to severe based on your body temperature.
Symptoms of hypothermia include:
being unsteady on your feet
slurred speech
poor co-ordination
confusion
not responding as normal
pale, cold and dry skin
loss of consciousness
slow or shallow breathing
Shivering is the body’s normal reaction to being cold. If you’re shivering without other symptoms, it’s important to warm up. Shivering by itself is not hypothermia.
In severe hypothermia, you may no longer be able to shiver even if you feel very cold to touch.
A baby with hypothermia may:
be cold to touch
be floppy
be unusually quiet and sleepy
refuse to be fed
Go to A&E or phone 999 if:
you or someone else has signs of hypothermia
First aid for someone with hypothermia
Watch this British Red Cross first aid training video for advice on basic first aid to treat hypothermia.
What to do while you’re waiting for help
If you think someone has hypothermia, there are things you can do while you’re waiting for help to arrive.
1. Move somewhere sheltered
If the person is outdoors, try to move them inside. If this isn’t possible, move them somewhere sheltered as quickly as you can.
Try to keep them out of the wind and off of the ground. For example, you could put a backpack underneath them.
2. Remove wet clothing
You should replace any wet clothes with dry clothes.
Once they’re out of wet clothing, wrap the person in blankets, a sleeping bag or a dry towel. Make sure their head is covered.
Do not remove your own clothing to give to the person. It’s important that you stay warm.
3. Stay with them
If the person is fully awake, offer them a warm drink and high energy foods like chocolate.
You should stay with them until help arrives. Keep talking to them to help keep them awake.
If you’re in a remote area and can’t phone for help, don’t go to get help alone. If possible, always go in a pair or group.
What not to do while you’re waiting for help
There are some things that you should not do when you’re waiting for help to arrive. These things could make hypothermia worse.
Don’t
do not rub their arms, legs, feet or hands
do not use a hot bath or heat lamp to warm them up
do not apply heat directly to the skin – use a jumper or a blanket to wrap up a hot water bottle or heat pad first
do not give them alcohol to drink
Treatment for hypothermia
If you have hypothermia, you’ll usually be treated in hospital. Your heart rate will be monitored and you may be given oxygen to help you breathe. You may also be given warm fluids straight into a vein to help your body warm up.
Treatment in intensive care may be needed if you have severe hypothermia.
What causes hypothermia?
Hypothermia can happen both indoors and outdoors. You can get it if you:
don’t wear enough warm clothing in cold weather
live in a cold house
stay out in the cold too long
have been in cold water
have damp or wet clothes and get cold
Hypothermia can also be caused by a medical condition like
sepsis
or an infection. If it’s caused by a medical problem, you’ll usually have other symptoms too.
Who’s most at risk of hypothermia?
Hypothermia can affect anyone but some people are more at risk, including:
people who are unable to afford fuel and heating costs during winter
older people – often due to medical conditions and being less able to regulate body temperature
young children – they lose heat quickly and can’t protect themselves in cold temperatures
disabled people – often due to reduced mobility, sensory impairments or medical conditions
people with long-term medical conditions, including thyroid, cardiovascular and respiratory conditions
people with mental health conditions
pregnant women
people who are sleeping rough
How to prevent hypothermia
There are some steps you can take to help prevent hypothermia.
Check your local weather forecast when you’re planning to spend time outdoors. You should check the forecasts again just before you leave to see the latest updates.
You should pack:
extra clothing, including another jacket, hat and gloves
a flask with a warm drink
waterproof clothing
high energy snacks
a bivvy bag and group shelter, if you’re going for a hike or a long walk.
When outdoors, you should:
wear several layers of clothing
check that children are warm enough
take breaks to warm up
try not to spend long periods in cold temperatures
change into dry clothing as possible if you get damp or wet
It’s also important to keep warm indoors when the weather is cold.
Complications of hypothermia
Hypothermia can:
increase the risk of blood clots
–
which leads to a higher risk of
heart attacks
and
strokes
increase the risk of
chest infections
worsen breathing problems
increase the risk of falls
Source:
NHS 24