Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/idiopathic-pulmonary-fibrosis/

---

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is where the lungs become scarred and breathing becomes more difficult.
It’s not clear what causes it, but it usually affects people around 70 to 75 years old. It’s rare to develop in people under 50. The older you are, the more likely you are to develop IPF.
Antifibrotic treatment can help slow IPF. But there’s currently no treatment that can stop or reverse the scarring of the lungs.
Symptoms of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
The symptoms of IPF tend to develop gradually and get slowly worse over time.
Symptoms can include:
shortness of breath
a persistent dry
cough
tiredness
loss of appetite and weight loss
rounded and swollen fingertips (clubbed fingers)
Many people ignore their breathlessness at first and blame it on getting old or being out of shape. But eventually even light activity like getting dressed can cause shortness of breath.
Secondary conditions
The strain IPF can put on your lungs and heart increases the risk of secondary conditions, like:
chest infections and airway infections, for example
bronchitis
,
pneumonia
and
influenza (flu)
pulmonary hypertension
right sided heart failure
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
You have:
struggled with your breathing for a while
had a cough for more than 3 weeks
Diagnosing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Your GP may ask if you:
smoke, or smoked in the past
have been exposed to harmful substances at work, such as asbestos
have other medical conditions
They may also:
check the sound of your breathing through a stethoscope – a crackling sound can suggest lung scarring (fibrosis)
look at your fingers to see if the ends are swollen (finger clubbing)
ask you to walk around for a few minutes to see if you become breathless
arrange a chest
X-ray
Tests
If your GP thinks you could have a lung condition like IPF, they can refer you to a hospital specialist for tests such as:
lung (pulmonary function) tests to check how well your lungs work
blood tests
a
computerised tomography (CT) scan
to see if there’s anything causing your symptoms like cancer, a build up of fluid or scarring
Usually, IPF is diagnosed without the need for additional tests. Sometimes your specialist may consider other tests such as:
bronchoscopy (where a narrow, flexible tube with a camera is passed down into your airways) to look for anything abnormal and take a tissue sample for testing
a lung
biopsy
(where a small piece of lung tissue is removed during keyhole surgery so it can be analysed)
an
echocardiogram
Treatments for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
There’s currently no cure for IPF, but there are several treatments that can help relieve the symptoms and slow down its progression.
Treatments include:
lifestyle changes – such as
stopping smoking
,
eating healthily
and
exercising regularly
medication such as pirfenidone and nintedanib to reduce the rate at which scarring worsens – often your specialist team will monitor you, your breathing tests and your scan to see if your condition is progressing over time before starting treatment
breathing oxygen through a mask
– if your oxygen levels are low when you’re resting, your specialist team may recommend wearing oxygen all the time, but if they are only low when you move around around, you may only need this when you are out and about
pulmonary rehabilitation – exercises and advice to help you breathe more easily
a
lung transplant
– this is suitable in a few cases, although donor lungs are rare and patients have to be otherwise very fit to benefit from a transplant
Causes of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
In people with IPF, the tiny air sacs in the lungs (alveoli) become damaged and increasingly scarred. This causes the lungs to become stiff and means it’s difficult for oxygen to get into the blood.
The reason this happens is not known. Idiopathic means the cause is unknown.
IPF has been linked to:
exposure to certain types of dust, such as metal or wood dust
viral infections
a family history of IPF
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)
smoking
But it’s not known whether some of these factors directly cause IPF.
Other lung diseases
As well as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, there are other forms of fibrotic lung disease. These include Non Specific Interstitial Pneumonia (NSIP), Hypersensitivity Pneumonia, Connective Tissue Disease related Interstitial Lung Disease, Vasculitis,
Asbestosis
and Sarcoidosis.
It’s possible to have other chronic lung diseases as well as fibrotic lung disease. This includes:
bronchiectasis
asthma
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
– this is known as Combined Pulmonary Fibrosis and Emphysema (CPFE)
End of life care
If you’re told there is nothing more that can be done to treat your IPF or you decide you don’t want treatment, your GP or care team will give you support and treatment to relieve your symptoms. This is called palliative care.
Read further information about
palliative care
.
Source:
                                        NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde