Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/insomnia/

---

Insomnia
British Sign Language (BSL)
Insomnia can mean both:
struggling to get to sleep
difficulty staying asleep
It’s a common problem thought to affect around 1 in 3 people in the UK. It’s particularly common in older adults.
Symptoms of insomnia
If you have insomnia, you might:
find it hard to fall asleep
lie awake at night
wake up several times during the night
wake up early in the morning and not be able to get back to sleep
not feel refreshed when you get up
feel tired and irritable during the day
have difficulty concentrating because you’re tired
Sometimes episodes of insomnia can come and go without causing any serious problems. But, some people can have insomnia for months or even years at a time.
Persistent insomnia can have an impact on your quality of life. It can limit what you’re able to do during the day and affect your mood. It can also lead to relationship problems with friends, family and colleagues.
How much sleep do I need?
Everyone needs different amounts of sleep.
Most adults sleep for 7 to 9 hours a night. Children and babies may sleep for much longer than this, whereas older adults may sleep less. What’s important is whether you feel you get enough sleep, and whether your sleep is good quality.
You’re probably not getting enough good-quality sleep if:
you always feel tired throughout the day
tiredness is affecting your everyday life
The Sleep Charity
has information to support parents and children.
This video requires YouTube cookies.
Update your consent
.
Watch more videos about sleep on Mind to Mind
Contact your GP practice if:
improving your sleep hygiene has not helped
poor sleep quality is affecting your daily life
you’re not looking after yourself
you’re finding it hard to manage any responsibilities you have
Find out how to get urgent help for your mental health
Your GP will first try to identify and treat any underlying health condition that may be causing your sleep problems. If it’s possible to identify an underlying cause of your sleeping difficulties, treating this may be enough to return your sleep to normal.
What causes insomnia?
Insomnia can be triggered by many factors. It’s not always possible to identify a clear cause.
The most common causes of insomnia are:
stress
anxiety
depression
noise
a room that’s too hot or cold
an uncomfortable bed
alcohol
caffeine
drugs
jet lag
shift work
If you feel unwell or think your sleep problems could be caused by medication, please speak to your GP or pharmacist.
Treatment for insomnia
The causes of insomnia vary so treatments can vary from person to person.
Try a self-help guide
You could try our sleep problems and insomnia self-help guide. It covers topics like:
symptoms of a sleep problem
causes of sleep problems
improving your sleep
calming a busy mind
Our mental health self-help guides are based on
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
. They’ve proven highly successful in helping people with anxiety and other mental health issues.
Start the sleep problems and insomnia self-help guide
Try an online CBT course
You could try an online course like
Sleepio
. Sleepio is a digital sleep improvement programme based on Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT.) It’s clinically proven to help address the root causes of poor sleep and insomnia.
Sign up for Sleepio
Improve your sleep hygiene
Insomnia can often be treated by improving your sleep hygiene.
This video requires YouTube cookies.
Update your consent
.
To improve your sleep hygiene, you need to look at both your sleep environment and your daily behaviours.
Do
make sure your bedroom is dark and quiet – use thick blinds, curtains, an eye mask or ear plugs
keep your bedroom at a comfortable temperature for sleeping – this should be slightly cooler than your living area
make sure your mattress, covers and pillow are comfortable
exercise regularly during the day
create a relaxing bedtime routine, like taking a bath or listening to gentle music
write any worries and ideas down before going to bed, so that you’re more likely to be able to forget them until morning
get up at a specific time each day and try to stick to this, even if you feel you’ve not had enough sleep
Don’t
do not nap during the day
do not exercise for at least 4 hours before going to bed
do not drink caffeinated drinks (like tea, coffee or fizzy drinks) for a few hours before going to bed
do not drink alcohol or smoke shortly before going to bed
do not eat a big meal just before bedtime
do not go to bed before you feel tired – it’s better to stay up until you’re ready to fall asleep than to go to bed early and worry about not sleeping
do not watch the clock when trying to sleep, as anxiety will only make your insomnia worse
do not use your bedroom for anything other than sleeping or sex
do not watch television, make phone calls, eat, or work in bed
What to do if you’re struggling to fall asleep
If you find you can’t fall asleep and you’re growing anxious about it, you should:
get up and go to a different room
do a relaxing activity, like reading or listening to music
try going to sleep again in around 20 minutes, or whenever you feel tired again
Psychological therapy
If changing your sleeping habits doesn’t help, your GP may refer you for a type of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) for people with insomnia. This is called CBT-I.
CBT-I aims to change unhelpful thoughts and behaviours that contribute to insomnia. It’s an effective treatment for many people and can have long-lasting results.
Medication for insomnia
In some circumstances, medication over the counter or on prescription can be used to help with insomnia.
Medication can be effective in the short term but it can also cause insomnia to get worse, cause addiction, or other side effects.
Source:
NHS 24