Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/itchy-skin/

---

Itchy skin
Itchy skin can be unpleasant but it’s not usually a sign of anything serious. You can usually treat it yourself and it’ll get better in a few weeks.
Symptoms of itchy skin
Itchy skin can affect any area of the body. It can either be:
generalised – it affects the whole body
localised – it only affects a specific area
Sometimes you may have a rash or spot as well as itchy skin.
Get help from a pharmacist
A pharmacist can help if you have itchy skin. Tell the pharmacist where your skin is itchy and if you have any other symptoms.
The pharmacist will tell you about the best products for your itchy skin. They might also be able to tell you if you need to see a GP.
Find a pharmacy near you
Speak to your GP practice if you have itchy skin that:
is affecting your daily life
does not get better with self care or keeps coming back
is caused by a new rash, lump or swelling that you’re worried about
is all over your body
is severe
happens during pregnancy
Diagnosing itchy skin
Your GP will ask you about your symptoms. For example, if anything makes your itch worse, or if it comes and goes. They’ll also examine your skin to check for any visible symptoms.
They may prescribe lotions, creams and medications to help reduce itchiness. This will depend on what’s causing your symptoms.
They may also arrange a blood test to help find out the cause of your itchy skin.
The GP may refer you to a doctor who specialises in skin problems (a dermatologist). They’ll examine your symptoms further and may recommend specific treatments.
Treatment for itchy skin
The treatment for itchy skin will depend on what’s causing your symptoms. Treatments may help relieve itching and reduce the risk of skin damage caused by scratching.
If you have itchy skin, some common treatments include:
a moisturiser or emollient – for dry or flaky skin
a cream with menthol – to cool the skin and prevent itching
a mild steroid cream – for inflamed areas
antihistamines – for an allergic reaction (these may not be suitable for everyone)
If you have itching in a hairy area like your scalp, lotions are available for this. This means you don’t have to use sticky creams.
What causes itchy skin?
Itchy skin can have many different causes. These include:
skin conditions – like
eczema
,
psoriasis
,
hives
, dandruff or
lichen planus
allergies
– for example, an allergy to cosmetics, plants or
certain foods
skin reactions – like
hives
or heat rash
parasites or insects living on the skin – like
head lice
,
pubic lice
or
scabies
bites and stings
infections – like
chickenpox
,
ringworm
, athlete’s foot or
vaginal thrush
hormonal changes during pregnancy or the
menopause
You should not try to self diagnose if you have itchy skin.
How to prevent itchy skin
Itchy skin will usually get better over a short period of time. There are some things you can do to help relieve itching and prevent damage caused by scratching.
Do
try patting or tapping the itchy area, rather than scratching it
hold a cold towel over the affected area to cool it down
use unperfumed moisturising lotions and emollients after bathing or showering
use mild laundry powder or liquid for sensitive skin
keep your nails clean, short and smooth
try to reduce how often you have a bath or shower, if possible
use cool or lukewarm water for showers and baths, rather than hot water
wear loose cotton or silk clothing whenever possible
wear cotton gloves at night to prevent damage from scratching in your sleep
wear cool, light and loose bedclothes
Don’t
do not wear tight clothes or clothes that irritate your skin – like wool and some man-made fabrics
do not use perfumed soap, shower gel or deodorants
do not spend a long time in the bath or shower
Source:
NHS 24