Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/itchy-bottom/

---

Itchy bottom
Itchy bottom is a strong urge to scratch the skin around your bottom (anus).
The anus is the opening at the lower end of the digestive system, where solid waste leaves your body.
Causes of itchy bottom
The cause of itchy bottom isn’t always known. If it gets better quickly without treatment, it may be the result of a short term issue. For example, sweating more in hot weather.
It’s rare for an itchy bottom alone to be a sign of something more serious.
If an itchy bottom lasts longer, you may be able to get an idea of the cause from other symptoms you have. But, you should not self-diagnose. Speak to your GP if you’re worried.
An itchy bottom that’s worse at night can be caused by threadworms. This is often the case for children.
You can’t take medicine for threadworms if you’re:
pregnant
breastfeeding
a child under 2
This means you should speak to a GP, midwife or health visitor instead.
Conditions with itchy bottom
Sometimes an itchy bottom can be a symptom of another problem or condition. This includes:
skin conditions
like
eczema
or
psoriasis
– if you have itching elsewhere on the body too
threadworms
(especially in children) – symptoms will get worse at night and there will be worms in poo (they look like bits of thread)
haemorrhoids (piles)
– swellings in and around the anus, as well as pain and blood when pooing
bowel incontinence
or
diarrhoea
– can cause poo leaking or pooing you can not control
sexually transmitted infection (STI)
like
genital warts
– can cause sores, swelling and irritation
ringworm
– can cause sores, swelling and irritation
Some long-term medications can also cause an itchy bottom. For example, steroid creams or peppermint oil.
When to get help
A pharmacist can often help to treat an itchy bottom. You can ask if they have a private area to discuss your symptoms.
They can suggest treatments like:
creams and ointments to relieve itching
medication if the symptoms are caused by threadworms
Find your nearest pharmacy
Speak to your GP if:
You have an itchy bottom that:
doesn’t get better after 3 to 4 days
keeps coming back
makes you anxious or depressed
affects your sleep
is painful
is accompanied by other symptoms, like itching elsewhere on your body
You should also speak to a GP if your itchy bottom is caused by an underlying condition like piles.
What to expect at your GP appointment
Your GP might need to check your bottom (a rectal examination) to help find out what’s causing your itching. You may feel awkward, but this is nothing to be embarrassed or worried about. It’s one of the most common examinations GPs carry out.
At your appointment, your GP may ask:
whether you use creams, powders or soaps around your bottom
how long you have had the itching
whether the itching gets worse at night or after eating certain foods
if you have any other symptoms
Your GP will decide on the best treatment for you depending on what’s causing your symptoms. They may suggest:
things you can do yourself to ease an itchy bottom
a stronger medication, cream or ointment
How to ease an itchy bottom yourself
Do
use soft toilet tissue
bath or shower daily
have shorter, cooler showers and baths
keep your bottom clean and dry
wear loose-fitting cotton underwear
change your underwear daily
only put underwear on when your bottom is completely dry
use a light duvet at night so you don’t get too hot
gently wash and dry your bottom after pooing and before bed
keep your fingernails short to stop your skin from being damaged by scratching
wear cotton gloves while sleeping to avoid damaging the skin if you scratch
wear stockings instead of tights
eat foods with fibre (fruit, vegetables and wholegrains) to help produce regular, solid poo
Don’t
do not wear tight clothing
do not use scented soaps, bubble bath or perfumes
do not use scented powders near your bottom
do not scratch if you can
do not eat food or drink that makes your itching worse, for example caffeine, alcohol, citrus fruit or spicy foods
Source:
NHS 24