Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/laryngitis/

---

Laryngitis
Laryngitis is inflammation of the larynx (voice box). In most cases, it gets better without treatment in about a week.
Symptoms of laryngitis
Symptoms of laryngitis can begin suddenly and usually get worse over a period of 2 to 3 days.
Common symptoms of laryngitis include:
hoarseness
difficulty speaking
sore throat
mild fever
irritating
cough
a constant need to clear your throat
The hoarse voice and speaking difficulties usually get worse each day you’re ill. They may last for up to a week after the other symptoms have gone.
In a few cases, the larynx can swell and cause breathing difficulties. This isn’t common in adults but can happen in young children who have smaller, narrower windpipes.
Laryngitis is often linked to another illness. For example, a
cold
,
flu
,
throat infection
or
tonsillitis
. So you might also have other symptoms such as:
a
headache
swollen glands
runny nose
pain when swallowing
feeling tired and achy
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
You or your child:
have symptoms that are particularly severe or they last longer than 2 weeks
experience breathing difficulties
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Do
drink plenty of water
try to rest your voice as much as possible
Don’t
do not smoke
do not spend time in smoky or dusty places
Treating the underlying cause
If you see your GP, they’ll discuss the possible causes with you and may refer you for tests or to a specialist in hospital.
In some cases, it may be possible to treat the underlying cause of laryngitis. For example, if the symptoms are caused by an allergic reaction, you may be able to:
avoid the thing you’re allergic to
take medication to help control your allergy
What causes laryngitis
In most cases, laryngitis is caused by either:
a viral infection – such as a
cold
or
flu
irritation to your larynx – for example by straining your voice or reflux
In these cases, most of the symptoms usually pass within a week. This is known as acute laryngitis.
Laryngitis can occasionally last much longer. This is known as chronic laryngitis. Chronic laryngitis can be caused by:
smoking
alcohol misuse
reflux
How to prevent laryngitis
As laryngitis is often caused by a common viral infection, such as a cold or flu, it’s not always possible to prevent it.
There are things you can reduce your risk of developing the condition.
Do
avoid smoking
make sure you have the
flu vaccine
every year if you’re eligible
wash your hands often, especially before handling food and after using the toilet
avoid close contact with people who have respiratory infections, such as a cold or flu – particularly if you’re prone to laryngitis
avoid irritants, such as smoke or dust – particularly if you have a
cold
or other respiratory infection
raise your head with pillows when you’re sleeping to protect your larynx from any acid reflux from your stomach during sleep
avoid regularly clearing your throat as this can irritate the larynx – try small sips of water instead
follow the
low-risk drinking guidelines
when drinking alcohol
avoid shouting or singing loudly or for long periods of time
Source:
ENT Scotland