Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/legionnaires-disease/

---

Legionnaires’ disease is a severe form of
pneumonia.
It’s caused by Legionella bacteria. Infection can be spread by breathing in droplets of water from things like hot tubs or air conditioning.
It’s uncommon but can be very serious.
Symptoms of Legionnaires’ disease
Symptoms of Legionnaires’ disease include:
a
cough
shortness of breath
chest pain or discomfort, particularly when breathing or coughing
a high temperature (
fever
)
flu-like symptoms
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
you have severe
chest pain
in the middle of your chest that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
Speak to your GP practice urgently if:
You have symptoms of Legionnaires’ disease, like:
a cough that’s lasted more than 3 weeks
coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
chest pain that happens when breathing in or coughing
feeling short of breath
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
You should tell your GP or healthcare professional where you’ve been in the last 10 days. This can include a hotel, spa or hospital.
Treatment for Legionnaires’ disease
You may need to stay in hospital if you’re diagnosed with Legionnaires’ disease.
Hospital treatment may include:
antibiotics given directly into a vein (intravenous)
oxygen through a face mask or tubes in your nose
a machine to help you breathe
When you start to feel better, you may be able to take antibiotic tablets at home. This treatment usually lasts between 1 to 3 weeks.
Most people make a full recovery, but it may take a few weeks for you to feel back to normal.
How Legionnaires’ disease is spread
Legionnaires’ disease can spread when you breathe in tiny droplets of water containing bacteria that cause the infection.
It’s usually found in places like hotels, hospitals or offices where the bacteria have gotten into the water supply. It’s less common for the infection to be passed on at home.
You can get Legionnaires’ disease from things like:
air conditioning systems
humidifiers
spa pools and hot tubs
taps and showers that are not used often
You can’t usually get it from:
drinking water that contains the bacteria
places like ponds, lakes, or rivers
Legionnaires’ disease can’t be passed on from person to person.
What causes Legionnaires’ disease
Legionella bacteria can grow in natural or artificial environments that have a water supply.
Another type of Legionella bacteria, called Legionella longbeachae, can also cause the infection. This type of bacteria is less common. It can grow in potted compost and soil.
Source:
Public Health Scotland