Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/healthy-living/womens-health/middle-years-around-25-to-50-years/long-term-conditions/lipoedema/

---

Lipoedema
Lipoedema is a long term (chronic) condition of fat and connective tissue which builds up in your legs, hips, bottom and sometimes arms. It affects both sides of the body equally.
It’s more common in women and only very rarely affects men. It’s not the same as obesity.
For some people, it can have a big impact on daily routine, physical health and emotional wellbeing.
Symptoms
People with lipoedema usually have a small waist, but large hips and thighs. Their upper body and lower body can be completely different sizes. This makes it difficult to shop for clothes that fit right.
Symptoms can include:
enlargement of your legs, and in some cases arms, but usually not your feet or hands
pain, discomfort, heaviness or tenderness affected areas
affected areas of your body can bruise easily, sometimes for no obvious reason
dimpled legs with a lumpy texture, fat may bulge at the knees
swelling that gets worse in the afternoon, evening, after activity or in hot weather
spider veins or
varicose veins
on your legs
difficulty walking due to changes in your leg shape, heavy legs, or ‘flat-feet’
Lipoedema can be linked to
mental health
problems, for example
depression
, anxiety and disordered eating.
Speak to your doctor if you are experiencing any of these symptoms. They’ll be able to give you help and advice on how to manage your symptoms.
Other conditions
Other health conditions, like
lymphoedema
, can cause large or swollen legs. Sometimes people with lipoedema can also develop this condition.
Causes
The exact cause of lipoedema isn’t known but it may be caused by changes in your hormones:
during puberty
when you’re pregnant
when you’re going through the menopause
when you’re taking the contraceptive pill
It’s not caused by being overweight – you can be a healthy weight and still have lipoedema.
Lipoedema can run in families so let your doctor know if you think this is the case for you.
Treatment and self-management
Treatment will depend on your symptoms and how they’re affecting you. If your doctor thinks you have lipoedema they may refer you to a specialist for treatment.
Although there’s no cure, there are things which may help.
Do
maintain a healthy weight by eating a balanced diet – this can also reduce your chances of developing other health conditions such as type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol
drink plenty of water
take part in activities you enjoy to keep active like swimming, dancing, yoga or walking
wear compression garments – tight forms of clothing that help to reduce pain and discomfort, as well as making it easier for you to walk
look after your skin – using moisturising cream (emollients) regularly will help to stop your skin drying out
manual lymphatic drainage – a specialist type of massage, which may help to reduce discomfort
counselling or cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) – if you’re finding it difficult to cope or if it’s affecting your mental health
Compression therapy
Compression therapy uses special compression garments to help manage symptoms. This can help to reduce pain, inflammation, and fluid build up (oedema).
Compression garments are often available on prescription. This can include stockings, socks, leggings, arm sleeves, adjustable wraps and sometimes bandaging.
Your doctor, practice nurse or specialist will recommend the most suitable type of compression garment for you. They’ll also advise you on how to use it.
Further support
Lipoedema can affect your quality of life and your
mental wellbeing
. Talking to someone and getting some extra support can really help.
You’re not alone.
Talk Lipoedema
have lots of help and advice about living well with lipoedema. They can also put you in touch with other people with lipoedema, so you can share your experiences of the condition.
Source:
                                        Scottish Government
Last updated:
07 April 2025
How can we improve this page?
Help us improve NHS inform
Thank You
Your feedback has been received
Don’t include personal information e.g. name, location or any personal health conditions.
Email Address
e.g. you@example.com
Message
Maximum of 500 characters
Send feedback
Add this page to
            Info For Me
Also on NHS inform
Physical activity guidelines
Health benefits of eating well
Other health sites
Talk Lipoedema: Liposuction for lipoedema
Legs Matter: Lipoedema
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852