Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/lyme-disease/

---

Lyme disease
Lyme disease is a bacterial infection spread to humans by infected ticks. It’s also known as Lyme borreliosis.
Ticks are tiny spider-like creatures found in woodland and moorland areas, grassy places, parks and gardens. They feed on the blood of birds and mammals, including humans.
Lyme disease is usually easier to treat the earlier it’s diagnosed.
Watch more videos on Lyme disease and tick bites
Symptoms of Lyme disease
Many people with early symptoms of Lyme disease develop a circular rash around the
tick bite
. The rash:
usually develops around 3 to 30 days after you have been bitten
may look like a bull’s-eye on a dart board
will be red
may feel slightly raised at the edges
may get bigger over several days or weeks
is usually around 15 cm (6 inches) across, but it can be smaller or much larger
Some people may develop several rashes in different parts of their body.
Around 1 in 3 people with Lyme disease will not develop a rash.
Sometimes the edges of the rash may feel slightly raised.
The rash may look like a bullseye on a dartboard.
Other symptoms of Lyme disease
Some people may have
flu-like symptoms
in the early stages of Lyme disease. This can include:
tiredness (fatigue)
muscle pain
joint pain
headaches
a high temperature (fever)
chills
neck stiffness
Speak to a GP practice if:
You’ve been bitten by a tick and you:
develop a rash
have flu-like symptoms
Remember to tell them you’ve been bitten by a tick.
Diagnosing Lyme disease
Diagnosing Lyme disease is often difficult. Many of the symptoms are similar to other conditions.
There are 2 kinds of
blood tests
that are used to diagnose Lyme disease. The tests are not always accurate in the early stages of Lyme disease. You may need to be tested more than once if you still have symptoms after a negative result.
Treatment for Lyme disease
If you have symptoms of Lyme disease, you’ll usually be given
antibiotics
.
If you’re prescribed antibiotics, it’s important to finish the course even if you’re feeling better. This will help to ensure all the bacteria are killed.
If your symptoms are particularly severe, you may need antibiotic injections (intravenous antibiotics).
Some of the antibiotics used to treat Lyme disease can make your skin more sensitive to sunlight. You should avoid prolonged exposure to the sun. You should not use sunbeds until after you have finished the treatment.
In some cases, symptoms can continue after antibiotic treatment has finished. This is called post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome. There’s currently no agreement on the best treatment for this because the underlying cause is not yet clear.
Be wary of internet sites offering alternative diagnostic tests and treatments for Lyme disease. These may not be supported by scientific evidence.
What causes Lyme disease?
Some animals can carry the bacteria that cause Lyme disease. If a tick bites the animal, it’ll become infected. The tick can then transfer the bacteria to a human by biting them.
Ticks don’t jump or fly. They climb on to your clothes or skin if you brush against something they’re on. They then bite into the skin and start to feed on your blood.
You’re more likely to become infected the longer the tick is attached to your skin. This means that removing them quickly is important. Ticks are very small and their bites are not painful, so you may not realise you have one attached to your skin.
Where ticks are found
Ticks are found throughout the UK and in other parts of Europe and North America. There are a high number of ticks in the Scottish Highlands.
They can be found in any areas with deep or overgrown plants where they have access to animals to feed on.
They’re common in woodland and moorland areas, but can also be found in gardens or parks.
Who’s most at risk of Lyme disease?
The risk of getting Lyme disease is higher:
for people who spend time in woodland or moorland areas
from March to October because more people take part in outdoor activities
Only a small number of ticks carry the bacteria that cause Lyme disease. Being bitten doesn’t mean you’ll definitely be infected. But, it’s important to be aware of the risk and speak to a GP if you start to feel unwell.
How to prevent Lyme disease
There’s currently no vaccine to prevent Lyme disease but there are some steps you can take to help prevent tick bites.
Do
stay on paths and avoid long grass when walking outdoors
wear a long-sleeved shirt and trousers tucked into your socks when walking outdoors
wear light-coloured fabrics for walking – this may help you to spot a tick on your clothing
use insect repellent on exposed skin
check your skin and clothing for ticks after being outdoors
check your children’s skin for ticks – especially the head and neck areas, including their scalp
check that pets do not bring ticks into your home in their fur
Complications of Lyme disease
More serious symptoms may develop if Lyme disease is not treated, or it’s not treated early. These symptoms can include:
pain and swelling in the joints
nerve problems – like numbness or pain in your limbs
memory problems
difficulty concentrating
heart problems
Some of these problems will get better with treatment but they can continue if treatment starts late.
Some people with Lyme disease can develop long-term symptoms. These may be like the symptoms of
fibromyalgia
or
chronic fatigue syndrome
. This is known as post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome.
It’s not clear why this happens but it may be linked to overactivity of your immune system.
Source:
NHS 24