Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/sexual-and-reproductive/lymphogranuloma-venereum-lgv/

---

Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV)
British Sign Language (BSL)
|
简体中文
|
Polski
|
Română
|
slovenčina
Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) is a sexually transmitted infection. It’s caused by a strain of chlamydia bacteria.
LGV is rare in Scotland and is mostly
found in men who have sex with men
. LGV in women is very rare.
Symptoms of LGV
Most people with LGV don’t notice any symptoms and don’t know they have it. So it’s important to get tested if you think you’re infected.
If you do develop symptoms, you may experience:
swollen lymph glands in the groin (in one or both sides)
an ulcer or sore on the penis, vagina or around the anus
You may notice some anal symptoms such as:
blood or pus from the anus on underwear or toilet paper
pain in the anal area when pooing or having receptive anal sex
constipation, painful straining or
diarrhoea
when trying to poo
a feeling of incomplete emptying after pooing
Testing for LGV
If you think you might have LGV, get tested for free by:
booking an appointment at your local sexual health service
contacting your GP practice for an appointment
What does the LGV test involve?
If you test positive for
chlamydia
, and your symptoms suggest that you might have LGV, the lab will do a further test for LGV.
The test for LGV is simple, painless and very reliable. It involves sending a sample from the area of the body thought to be infected to a lab for analysis. This can take up to 3 weeks.
The 2 main ways the sample can be collected are:
using a swab – a small cotton bud is gently wiped over the area that might be infected, such as inside the vagina, throat, or inside the anus
urine sample – this should ideally be done at least 1 or 2 hours after you last peed
Your partner (s) for the past 3 months should also be tested for LGV.
Treatment for LGV
Antibiotics will treat the LGV infection.
The result of the LGV test can take 3 weeks to come back, so your doctor may advise you to start treatment before the final result is available.
If left untreated, LGV can cause scarring and swelling of the skin. It can also cause permanent swelling of the genitals. Rectal infection can also cause swelling and scarring resulting in the risk of long-term bowel complications. Rarely the infection may spread via the bloodstream causing inflammation of the joints or liver.
To avoid passing LGV on to your partner(s) you should avoid having sex until both you and your partner have finished your treatment.
How LGV is passed on
You can get LGV by having unprotected vaginal, anal or oral sex (sex without a condom).
Your risk of getting LGV may be increased by:
chemsex
having group sex
fisting
sharing sex toys that aren’t washed or covered with a new condom each time they’re used
How to prevent LGV
The best way to reduce your risk of STIs is to practice
safer sex
. This means using a condom for vaginal, anal and oral sex.
Other STIs
If you have been diagnosed with LGV you should get tested for all STIs including:
gonorrhoea
syphilis
HIV
Source:
Scottish Government