Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/blood-and-lymph/lymphoedema/

---

Lymphoedema
Lymphoedema is a long-term condition that causes swelling in the body’s tissues. It can affect any part of the body, but usually develops in the arms or legs.
Lymphoedema is caused by a problem with the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is a group of vessels and glands around the body. It helps to fight infection and drain excess fluid from tissues.
Symptoms of lymphoedema
The main symptom of lymphoedema is swelling.
At first, the swelling may come and go. It may get worse during the day and better overnight. Without treatment, it can get worse.
Other symptoms in an affected body part can include:
an aching, heavy feeling
difficulty moving
skin infections that keep coming back
the skin becoming hard and tight
folds in the skin
wart-like growths on the skin
fluid leaking through the skin
If you have swelling of one leg more than the other, it’s important to consider other possible causes. For example,
deep vein thrombosis
(DVT). You should get medical advice if you’re worried about DVT.
Speak to your GP practice or care team if you:
think you may have lymphoedema
develop symptoms of skin infection like redness and a feeling of heat in the skin
Diagnosing lymphoedema
Your doctor may be able diagnose lymphoedema by:
asking about your symptoms and medical history
examining the affected body part and measuring to check if it’s enlarged
You may be at risk of lymphoedema due to cancer treatment. Your aftercare may include monitoring for the condition. You can talk to your care team if you have any worries.
Treatment for lymphoedema
The main treatment for lymphoedema is decongestive lymphatic therapy (DLT). DLT is not a cure, but it can help control the symptoms.
There are 4 parts to DLT. These are:
compression bandages and garments – move fluid out of the affected limb and prevent more fluid from building up
skin care – keeps the skin in good condition and reduces the chances of infection
exercises – helps use muscles in the affected limb to improve lymph drainage
manual lymphatic drainage (MLD) – a specialised massage that helps the flow of fluid in the lymphatic system and reduces swelling
What causes lymphoedema?
Primary lymphoedema
Primary lymphoedema is caused by changes (mutations) in genes that develop in the lymphatic system. This means that the lymphatic system either:
doesn’t develop properly, or
doesn’t work as it should
Primary lymphoedema usually runs in families. Not every child born to someone with the condition will develop it themselves.
Secondary lymphoedema
Secondary lymphoedema develops in people who previously had a normal lymphatic system. It’s more common than primary lymphoedema.
Causes include:
cancer treatment – like surgery or radiotherapy
infections – like severe
cellulitis
inflammation – like
rheumatoid arthritis
or
eczema
abnormal or damaged veins – like
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
or
varicose veins
obesity
trauma and injury to the lymphatic system
lack of movement and exercise
How to prevent lymphoedema
There are things you can do to help reduce your chances of developing lymphoedema, or prevent it getting worse.
Do
eat a healthy diet
maintain a healthy weight
exercise regularly
How to help prevent infections
There are some things that can help reduce your chance of developing skin infections. For example, you should:
treat cuts and scratches immediately with an antiseptic cream
use insect repellents to prevent
insect bites
moisturise the skin daily – speak to your healthcare team to find the right cream for you
avoid very hot baths and showers – the heat from saunas, steam rooms and sun beds may also increase swelling
use sun cream with a high sun protection factor (SPF) to prevent
sunburn
wear gloves for gardening and household tasks to avoid cuts, if your upper limbs are affected
use anti-fungal powder to prevent fungal infections in your skin or feet, if your lower limbs are affected
cut your nails with nail clippers
visit a chiropodist for foot and nail care – make sure you tell them you have lymphoedema
wear shoes that fit correctly and provide support on the top of your feet, if your lower limbs are affected
use an electric razor if you need to shave to reduce the risk of cutting yourself
avoid wearing tight-fitting clothes or jewellery
Complications of lymphoedema
Cellulitis
(a bacterial infection of the skin) is a common complication of lymphoedema. The build-up of fluid increases the risk of infection.
Living with a long-term condition like lymphoedema can also affect your
mental health
. Speak to your GP practice if you’re feeling low or lymphoedema is affecting your daily life.
Talking to other people who have lymphoedema can help. The
Lymphoedema Support Network
offers information and advice. They can also put you in touch with a support group in your area.
Source:
NHS 24