Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/measles/

---

Measles
Measles is a viral infection that spreads very easily. It’s unpleasant and can sometimes have serious complications. Having the
measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine
is the best way to prevent it.
Anyone can get measles if they haven’t been vaccinated or they haven’t had it before.
People usually recover from measles 7 to 10 days after symptoms appear.
What does measles look like?
This video requires Marketing cookies.
Update your consent
.
Symptoms of measles
The first symptoms of measles develop around 10 days after you’re infected. These can include:
cold-like symptoms, such as a runny nose, sneezing, and a
cough
sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light
watery eyes
swollen eyes
a high temperature (fever), which may reach around 40°C (104°F)
small greyish-white spots in the mouth
aches and pains
loss of appetite
tiredness, irritability and a general lack of energy
The measles rash appears around 2 to 4 days after the initial symptoms and normally fades after about a week. The rash:
is made up of small red-brown, flat or slightly raised spots that may join together into larger blotchy patches – it may be harder to see on brown and black skin
usually first appears on the head or neck, before spreading outwards to the rest of the body
is not usually itchy
Measles rash
Go to A&E or phone 999 if:
You think you or your child have measles and:
have a seizure (fit)
have severe difficulty breathing – you’re gasping, choking or not able to get words out (babies may make grunting noises or their stomach may suck under their ribcage)
are unable to stay awake – cannot keep their eyes open for more than a few seconds
suddenly become confused – your child may be very unsettled, behaving differently, or crying non-stop
your child is limp, floppy or not responding normally – their head may fall to the side, backwards or forwards, or they may find it difficult to lift their head and focus on your face
a rash that does not fade when you press a glass against it
a stiff neck, or find light uncomfortable or painful
Phone your GP urgently if:
You think you or your child may have measles and:
your child is under 1 year old and has come into contact with someone who has measles
you’ve been in close contact with someone who has measles and you’re pregnant or have a weakened immune system
you or your child have a high temperature
you or your child have difficulty breathing – you may feel more short of breath than usual
your baby or young child is not feeding well, or taking less feeds or fluids than usual
you or your child are peeing less than usual (or your baby has fewer wet nappies)
you or your child feels very unwell, or you’re worried something is seriously wrong
If your GP is closed, phone 111.
You should phone your GP first before visiting. They can make arrangements to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others.
Who’s at higher risk of measles?
You might be more at risk of having measles, or of experiencing complications from measles, if you’re:
under 12 months old
have a weakened immune system (even if you’ve been immunised against measles)
pregnant
Is measles serious?
Measles can be unpleasant, but will usually pass in about 7 to 10 days without causing any further problems.
Once you’ve had measles, your body builds up resistance (immunity) to the virus. It’s highly unlikely you’ll get it again.
However, measles can lead to serious and potentially life-threatening complications in some people. These include infections of the lungs
(pneumonia)
and brain (encephalitis).
How measles is spread
The measles virus is contained in tiny droplets that come out of the nose and mouth when an infected person breathes, coughs or sneezes.
You can easily catch measles by breathing in these droplets from the air. Or, if the droplets have settled on a surface, by touching the surface and then placing your hands near your nose or mouth. The virus can survive on surfaces for a few hours.
People with measles are infectious from when the symptoms develop until about 4 days after the rash first appears.
How to prevent spreading measles to others
If you have measles:
stay off nursery, school or work for at least 4 days from when the rash first appears
regularly wash your hands with soap
cough or sneeze into tissues and throw used tissues in the bin
avoid close contact with anyone who avoid close contact with anyone who hasn’t had 2 doses of the MMR vaccine
avoid contact with those who are higher risk of measles, like anyone who is pregnant, who has a weakened immune system, or is under 12 months old
How measles can be prevented
Measles can be prevented by having the
MMR vaccine
.
This is given in 2 doses as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme.
You can be vaccinated at any age if you haven’t been fully vaccinated before.
If the MMR vaccine isn’t suitable for you, a treatment called human normal immunoglobulin (HNIG) can be used if you’re at immediate risk of catching measles.
Treatment for measles
There are things you can do to help relieve your symptoms.
Do
take paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve fever, aches and pains – aspirin should not be given to children under 16 years old
drink plenty of water to avoid
dehydration
use damp cotton wool to clean the eyes
In severe cases, especially if there are complications, you or your child may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment.
Source:
NHS 24