Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/neck-and-back-problems-and-conditions/mechanical-neck-pain/

---

Mechanical neck pain
This information may be useful for those who have been diagnosed with mechanical neck pain. People who are experiencing new or ongoing symptoms should contact their healthcare professional.
Read about managing a neck problem
What is mechanical neck pain?
Mechanical neck pain is a common problem. Two out of three of us will experience it at some point. It’s not usually serious and most often eases on its own.
Healthcare professionals also sometimes call mechanical neck pain:
simple neck pain
non-specific neck pain
Speak to your GP urgently if:
You have experienced a new onset or significant worsening of the following symptoms:
changes to bladder and bowel function e.g. urgency, frequency, difficulty passing urine, leaking, incontinence
changes to sensation around the bottom and/or genitals or sexual dysfunction e.g. recent inability to achieve orgasm or erection
reduced balance or difficulty walking
pain, weakness, heaviness or changing sensation in the arms or legs
clumsy hands e.g. dropping things, struggling with handwriting, buttons or zips
if your neck pain is associated with a severe headache
Phone 111 if your GP practice is closed.
Speak to your GP if you have neck pain:
and you also feel generally unwell
that starts when you are ill with other problems – such as rheumatoid arthritis or cancer
Symptoms of mechanical neck pain
Mechanical neck pain most commonly affects the neck however, symptoms can spread into the arm, shoulder blade or into the head.
Symptoms include:
pain and stiffness
muscle tightness or spasms
numbness and tingling
clicking and grinding – this is quite common and can sound alarming but is not usually serious
Diagnosing mechanical neck pain
Mechanical neck pain can be diagnosed following an assessment from a healthcare professional. They’ll ask questions about your symptoms and carry out a physical examination.
Scans and X-rays are not usually required to diagnose mechanical neck pain. However in some cases, further examinations may be helpful to rule out other serious health conditions.
What causes mechanical neck pain?
Mechanical neck pain can occur after an injury, like
whiplash
. However, many people develop it for no obvious reason.
It can be caused by a number of things like:
muscle strain or tension
injuries from sport or work activities
staying in one position for too long
Your neck is a strong and resilient structure. Most neck pain does not cause lasting damage, as your body is very good at healing itself. In most cases you shouldn’t need to speak to a healthcare professional.
Pain can also be influenced by anything that impacts general health, like:
poor sleep
anxiety
stress
emotional wellbeing
As we get older, it’s normal to have age-related changes in our neck. Often these occur with no symptoms, but, they may contribute to neck pain. The medical term for this ageing is
cervical spondylosis
. It’s managed in the same way as mechanical neck pain.
Treatment for mechanical neck pain
There are many things you can do to help your mechanical neck pain.
Exercise
Gentle exercises can help keep your neck moving. Exercises increase the blood flow to the tissues and help with healing.
Exercises may be uncomfortable to start but they are safe to do. They’ll become much easier as you get movement back. Its known that being afraid of moving can worsen your pain. Any movement can be helpful.
Read about exercises for neck problems
Pain management
Pain medication can help you move more comfortably, which can help manage your symptoms.
More about taking painkillers.
Heat or ice packs
Using heat or ice on your neck can help reduce symptoms. Use a barrier, like a towel, to protect your skin from a burn. Never place heat or ice directly on your skin. Leave a few hours between treatments.
How to avoid hot water bottle burns and scalds – Care of Burns in Scotland
You should stop treating the area with heat or ice if you notice an increase in redness, discolouration or blistering of the skin.
Read more about burns and scalds
If you have any issues with circulation or sensation, you shouldn’t use heat or ice as a treatment for neck pain.
Lifestyle
Things that you do day-to-day can impact your pain levels.
Lifestyle advice includes:
staying active
modifying activities and pacing techniques
maintaining a healthy weight
stopping smoking
managing stress
and
emotional wellbeing
Work
Problems linked to neck pain can sometimes mean you need to take some time off work. This may depend on the nature of your symptoms and your role at work.
You should speak to your employer to see if you need any workplace adjustments.
Continuing to work or returning to work as soon as you feel able will help your recovery.
Gradually getting back to your normal daily activities can help to build up strength and stamina.
Help and support
Following this advice, you should see gradual improvements over time. If your symptoms have not improved after 8 weeks, or get worse, talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
How to access MSK services in your area
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group