Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/healthy-living/mental-wellbeing/

---

Mental wellbeing
Advice on dealing with low mood, anxiety, phobias, stress and where you can get help.
Social connections for mental wellbeing
Find out more about how to connect with others.
Being active for your mental wellbeing
Find out more about the benefits of being active and learn easy ways to be more active.
Get help with your mental health
Use our tool to find the right SilverCloud, Daylight or Sleepio course to help improve your mental health and wellbeing
Improve mental wellbeing by learning new things
Advice on how learning can support your mental wellbeing and tips to help you keep learning.
Mindfulness for mental wellbeing
Learn about mindfulness, how it can help your mental wellbeing and find out how to practice it in your day-to-day life.
Mind to Mind
Other people share the small changes that have made a big difference to their mental wellbeing
Addictions
Problem gambling
Learn about the signs of problem gambling and how to get help and support.
Anger management
How to control your anger
Anger can become a problem if you find it difficult to keep it under control. Find out how to recognise signs of anger and how to manage it.
Why am I so angry?
Find out what causes anger problems and where to get help for anger issues.
Anxiety and panic
How to deal with panic and anxiety
Find out ways to manage anxiety or panic.
Dealing with traumatic events
Support for people who have experienced a traumatic event
There are many organisations that can provide advice and support after traumatic events
Fears and phobias
10 ways to fight your fears
Whatever it is that makes you feel afraid, here are 10 ways to help you cope with your day-to-day fears and anxieties.
Coping with a fear of the dentist
Tips on coping with your fear of the dentist, including advances in dentistry and sedation clinics
Mental health self-help guides
Anxiety self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for anxiety that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Bereavement and grief self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for coping with bereavement and grief that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Chronic pain self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) to help you live with chronic pain.
Depression self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for depression that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for mild-to-moderate obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Panic self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for panic that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Phobias self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for phobias that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Problems with anger self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for managing problems with anger based on Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT).
Problem solving self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for problem solving based on Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT).
PTSD and CPTSD self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for PTSD and CPTSD based on Trauma-Focused Cognitive Therapy (TF-CT).
Self-esteem self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) to improve self-esteem.
Sleep problems and insomnia self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and expert advice to manage sleep problems.
Social anxiety self-help guide
Work through a self-help guide for social anxiety that uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Pregnancy
Your mental health and wellbeing after birth
How to look after your mental wellbeing after the birth and when to get help
Your mental health and wellbeing in pregnancy
How to look after your mental wellbeing during pregnancy and when to get help
Stress
10 stress busters
Try these 10 tips to help you deal with stress
6 easy time-management tips
Learn 6 easy time-management tips to help take control of your days.
Breathing and relaxation exercises
Breathing and relaxation exercises can help to relieve stress and relax your body and mind. Find out more.
Coping with money worries
Find sources of advice and support to help you cope with money worries.
How to manage stress at work
Get advice on managing work-related stress and find out ways to manage stress at work.
What to do if you are struggling with stress
Learn what to do if you are struggling to deal with stress
Therapy and counselling
Find the right therapist for you
Get advice on finding the right therapist for you and how to get the most out of talking therapy.
Women's health
Self-help tool: Menopause and mental wellbeing
Help with anxiety, stress, depression, anger, self-esteem and sleep.
Self-help tool: Periods and mental wellbeing
Help with anxiety, low mood, anger, self-esteem, sleep problems and social anxiety
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852