Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/middle-ear-infection-otitis-media/

---

Middle ear infection (otitis media)
Otitis media is an infection of the middle ear. It causes inflammation (redness and swelling) and a build-up of fluid behind the eardrum.
Anyone can develop a middle ear infection, but they’re most common in young children.
You do not always need to see a GP as most ear infections get better on their own within 3 to 5 days.
Symptoms of a middle ear infection
The main symptoms of a middle ear infection include:
earache
a high temperature (fever)
being sick
a lack of energy
slight
hearing loss
– if the middle ear becomes filled with fluid
In some cases, a hole may develop in the eardrum (perforated eardrum) and pus may run out of the ear. The earache, which is caused by the build-up of fluid stretching the eardrum, then resolves.
Signs in young children
Young children and babies with an ear infection may also:
rub or pull their ear
not react to some sounds
be irritable or restless
be off their food
keep losing their balance
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
You or your child has:
symptoms that do not improve within 2 or 3 days
regular ear infections
a lot of pain
a discharge of pus or fluid from the ear
an underlying health condition, such as
cystic fibrosis
or
congenital heart disease
, which could make complications more likely
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Treatment for middle ear infections
Most ear infections get better on their own within 3 to 5 days and do not need any specific treatment.
If needed,
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
can be used to relieve pain and a high temperature. Always read the leaflet that comes with your medicine before taking it. Follow the recommended dosage instructions. If you’re not sure which treatments are suitable for you or your child,
speak to a pharmacist
for advice.
Placing a warm cloth over the affected ear may also help relieve pain.
Antibiotics
are not usually used to treat middle ear infections.
What causes middle ear infections?
Most middle ear infections occur when an infection, such as a
cold
, leads to a build-up of mucus in the middle ear. This causes the Eustachian tube (a thin tube that runs from the middle ear to the back of the nose) to become swollen or blocked. The mucus can’t drain away properly, making it easier for an infection to spread into the middle ear.
An enlarged adenoid (soft tissue at the back of the throat) can also block the Eustachian tube. The adenoid can be removed if it often causes ear infections.
Middle ear infections are more common in younger children because:
the Eustachian tube is smaller in children than in adults
a child’s adenoids are relatively larger than an adults
Certain conditions can also increase the risk of middle ear infections, including:
having a cleft palate
having
Down’s syndrome
Can middle ear infections be prevented?
It’s not possible to prevent middle ear infections. There are some things you can do that may reduce your child’s risk of developing one.
Do
make sure your child is up-to-date with their routine vaccinations – particularly the
pneumococcal vaccine
and the
DTaP/IPV/Hib/HepB (6-in-1) vaccine
if possible, feed your baby with breast milk rather than formula milk
Don’t
do not expose your child to smoky environments (passive smoking)
do not give your child a dummy once they’re older than 12 months old
do not feed your child while they’re lying flat on their back
Children who go to nursery or school can pick up infections from other children who are unwell.
Complications of middle ear infections
Complications of middle ear infections are fairly rare, but can be serious.
Most complications are the result of the infection spreading to another part of the ear or head. Rarely, infections can leave a perforation or hole in the eardrum.
If complications do develop, they often need to be treated immediately with antibiotics in hospital.
Source:
ENT Scotland