Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/pregnancy-and-childbirth/losing-a-baby/miscarriage/

---

Miscarriage
A miscarriage is the loss of a pregnancy before 24 weeks.
About 1 in 5 pregnancies miscarry. Since many miscarriages aren’t recorded the figure might be higher.
For many people who have a pregnancy or baby loss, the word ‘miscarriage’ doesn’t properly express the impact of their loss.
Symptoms of miscarriage
Miscarriage symptoms can be varied. Some people have very clear symptoms, while others may experience none at all.
Miscarriage signs can change, depending on whether you’re having an
early miscarriage
or a
late miscarriage
.
Phone 999 or go to your nearest A&E if you’re pregnant and you:
have sharp, sudden and intense stomach pains
feel very dizzy or faint
feel very sick
look very pale
have vaginal bleeding or spotting, commonly after the pain has started
have pain in your shoulder tip
have diarrhoea and are vomiting
Get medical help if you’re pregnant and:
you’re bleeding from your vagina
you’ve got strong, cramping pain
your waters break
you have started to feel your baby move (usually this is from about 16-24 weeks) and the movements have slowed down or stopped
Before 12 weeks, contact your GP or your local
early pregnancy unit
. If your GP is closed, phone 111.
12 weeks or after, contact your local maternity service. If you’re not registered with the maternity service, contact your GP or NHS 24 on 111.
Early miscarriages
An early miscarriage happens in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Most women who miscarry do so in the first 12 weeks of their pregnancy.
Many women have a miscarriage before they even know they’re pregnant. If this happens it can feel like a late period with heavy bleeding.
Read more about early miscarriages
Late miscarriages
A late miscarriage happens after 12 weeks and before 24 weeks.
Read more about late miscarriages
What causes a miscarriage?
Most of the time there’s no clear reason why a miscarriage happens. It’s unlikely to be caused by anything you did or did not do.
Read more about the causes of a miscarriage
Making difficult decisions
If you’re having a miscarriage, your doctor, nurse or midwife will:
talk to you about what will happen next
help you, and your partner if you have one, decide what you’d like to do
You may have difficult decisions to make at this time. Your emotions may also feel overwhelming. Take your time. Your doctor, nurse or midwife can help. There are also organisations that can support you and your family.
Read more about getting support after a miscarriage
After a miscarriage
Depending on your circumstances and stage of pregnancy, you may be able to see or hold your baby. The doctor, nurse or midwife treating you will discuss this with you.
Some parents decide they don’t want to see their baby. Others choose not to for faith or cultural reasons. This is a decision only you can make. It can be very hard when you’re feeling overwhelmed. Whatever you decide is okay.
If you’re worried about what your baby looks like, your doctor or midwife can describe them to help you decide.
Physical wellbeing after a miscarriage
After a miscarriage, it’s likely you’ll have some bleeding for a week or two. Some people continue to have other symptoms as well as bleeding after a miscarriage. This can mean that some of the pregnancy tissue is still in your uterus (womb). You may need medicine or a short operation to treat this.
If you’re worried about seeking treatment, ask a family member or friend to come with you. Having support is important at this difficult time.
Read more about supporting someone who’s lost a baby
Working after a miscarriage
You may wish to take time off work after a miscarriage. The time you take off is a personal decision and may depend on:
how far along your pregnancy was before you miscarried
the policies of your workplace
Read more about working after a miscarriage
Recurrent miscarriages
Most people go on to have a successful pregnancy and a healthy baby after a miscarriage. But unfortunately, some people have repeated miscarriages.
If you’ve had 1 or 2 miscarriages, you’re no more likely than anyone else to have another miscarriage. But, if you’ve had 3 or more miscarriages, you may wish to speak to your doctor, nurse or midwife for further advice.
Read more about recurrent miscarriages
Source:
                                        Scottish Government