Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/pregnancy-and-childbirth/losing-a-baby/molar-pregnancy/

---

Molar pregnancy
A molar pregnancy happens when a fertilised egg has too much, or too little, genetic material. Because of this, the egg cannot develop into a baby.
Molar pregnancies are very rare. Only 1 in 600 pregnancies will be a molar pregnancy.
Types of molar pregnancy
There are 2 main types of molar pregnancy.
Complete mole
A complete mole is a fertilised egg that has too little genetic material inside it.
This usually happens when a single sperm fertilises an ‘empty’ egg. Because this egg has no genetic material inside, a baby cannot develop. Instead, clusters of abnormal cells will develop in your womb. This is called molar tissue.
A complete molar pregnancy will cause a positive pregnancy test and pregnancy symptoms. This is because of the molar tissue.
Partial mole
A partial mole is a fertilised egg that has too much genetic material inside. This can happen because:
2 sperm have fertilised a normal egg
an egg had double the normal amount of genetic material before being fertilised
Because there’s too much genetic material, a baby cannot fully develop from a partial mole. Instead, clusters of abnormal cells (called molar tissue) grow in the uterus (womb). Sometimes, a baby may be seen during an ultrasound scan. The baby will be smaller than expected, and cannot survive to full term.
Even if you cannot see a baby on an ultrasound scan, the molar tissue will cause a positive pregnancy test. You’ll also experience pregnancy symptoms.
Symptoms of a molar pregnancy
Often, you won’t have any specific symptoms of a molar pregnancy. Some people do experience:
vaginal bleeding
a dark discharge from the vagina that contains small, grape-like lumps
severe morning sickness
a high temperature
an unusually swollen tummy
high blood pressure
protein in your pee, which might make your pee foamy, frothy or bubbly
tiredness
weakness
twitching or trembling
stomach pain
These symptoms can be normal in pregnancy. Having them does not mean there’s definitely a problem with your baby. However, you should contact your
local early pregnancy unit
who can check you over.
Diagnosing a molar pregnancy
Most molar pregnancies are identified from the results of your routine ultrasound scans. The images in the scan will look unusual. This is not enough to be certain that you’re experiencing a molar pregnancy. You’ll be offered a blood test to confirm.
Sometimes, a molar pregnancy causes an
early miscarriage
before it’s diagnosed. In this case, you’d only find out that it was a molar pregnancy if tests are done after miscarriage.
Causes of a molar pregnancy
Molar pregnancies are caused by problems with the genetic information in an egg or sperm. It’s not known what causes the problems with genetic information.
There are some factors that can increase the risk of molar pregnancy. You’re more likely to have a molar pregnancy if:
you’re a young person (under 18 years)
you’re over 45 years old
you’re of Asian origin
you’ve had a molar pregnancy before
you have a diet that is low in vitamin A
Even if you fit into several of these categories, it’s most likely that you’ll not have a molar pregnancy. It’s still a rare condition. You’re just a little more likely to have a molar pregnancy than those who do not fit into these categories.
Treating a molar pregnancy
A molar pregnancy cannot develop into a baby. There’s no way to correct the amount of genetic material in the fertilised egg. This means you’ll need to have surgery to have the pregnancy removed.
Some people develop a gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) after a molar pregnancy. This is a rare, but highly curable, form of cancer.
After your surgery, you’ll be registered with the Hydatidiform mole follow-up centre. This centre is within Ninewells hospital in Dundee. They’ll provide follow up appointments and monitor you for signs of GTN. They do this by checking the level of hCG (a pregnancy hormone) in your blood and urine (pee).
The centre will work with your local GP to do the blood and urine tests. You’ll not need to travel to Dundee to have these tests done.
It’s important that you do not become pregnant again before finishing follow-up treatment. A new pregnancy will cause your hCG levels to rise. This means the specialists cannot tell if you’ve developed GTN.
Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN)
GTN is very curable type of cancer. It can be caused by the molar tissue growing in your uterus.
Over 99% of people with GTN make a full recovery.
GTN is usually diagnosed because specialists detect high hCG in your blood or urine (pee). Unusual vaginal bleeding can also be a sign of GTN.
These specialists will discuss treatment options with you. You may be offered:
surgery to remove the tissue
chemotherapy
If you have GTN, you should not become pregnant for a year after finishing chemotherapy. This is because, in rare cases, the GTN could come back.
Getting pregnant after molar pregnancy
Having a molar pregnancy should not stop you from getting pregnant again.
If you’ve had a molar pregnancy before, the risk of you having another is higher than a person who has never had one. But this risk is very small. Only 1 in 80 people who’ve had a molar pregnancy will have another.
Support after a molar pregnancy
Experiencing a molar pregnancy can be a difficult time emotionally. You may grieve for your lost baby, and feel frustration because no one can explain why this happened.
You may also feel anxious about GTN, especially as you wait for your follow up treatment to finish.
Read more about coping after losing a baby
Source:
                                        Scottish Government