Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mouth/mouth-ulcer/

---

Mouth ulcer
Mouth ulcers are painful sores that appear in the mouth. They’re uncomfortable but they’re usually harmless. Most clear up by themselves within 1 to 2 weeks.
Mouth ulcers are common and can usually be managed at home, without seeing your dentist or GP.
What does a mouth ulcer look like?
Mouth ulcers are usually round or oval sores that commonly appear inside the mouth on the:
cheeks
lips
tongue
They can be white, red, yellow or grey in colour and swollen.
You may have more than one mouth ulcer at a time and they may spread or grow.
Mouth ulcers shouldn’t be confused with
cold sores
, which are small blisters that develop on the lips or around the mouth. Cold sores often begin with a tingling, itching or burning sensation around your mouth.
When to get help
Speak to a pharmacist if:
you have a mouth ulcer
They can give you advice and treatment.
If you have a dental problem you should always
phone your dentist
first. If you’re not registered with any dental practice then you should
read our advice on dental emergencies
.
Your pharmacist may advise that you see your GP or dentist if:
your mouth ulcer has lasted 3 weeks
you keep getting mouth ulcers
the mouth ulcer grows bigger than usual or is near the back of your throat
your mouth ulcer becomes more painful or red – this could be a sign of a bacterial infection, which may need treatment with
antibiotics
Mouth ulcers are also a possible symptom of
hand, foot and mouth disease
. Speak to your GP or phone
111
if you’re unsure.
How to treat mouth ulcers
Most mouth ulcers clear up by themselves within 1 to 2 weeks without treatment.
However, treatment can help to reduce swelling and ease any discomfort. This may help if you keep getting mouth ulcers or your mouth ulcer affects eating and drinking.
Self care
There are things you can do to speed up healing.
Do
use a soft toothbrush to brush your teeth
drink cool drinks through a straw
eat softer foods
get regular dental check-ups
eat a healthy, balanced diet
try to reduce stress and anxiety
Don’t
do not eat very spicy, salty or acidic food
do not eat rough, crunchy food, such as toast or crisps
do not drink very hot or acidic drinks, such as fruit juice
do not use chewing gum
do not use toothpaste containing sodium lauryl sulphate
Pharmacy medicines
You can get several types of mouth ulcer treatment from a pharmacy. Speak to your pharmacist about the best treatment for you.
Treatment from a dentist or GP
A GP or dentist may prescribe stronger medicine to treat severe, persistent or infected mouth ulcers.
Possible treatments include:
steroid mouth spray or steroid tablets that dissolve in your mouth
painkilling gels, ointments, sprays or tablets
mouthwashes to kill or remove any germs in your mouth
What causes mouth ulcers?
In many cases, the reason for mouth ulcers is unclear. Most single mouth ulcers are caused by damage to the lining inside of the mouth. For example:
accidentally biting the inside of your cheek or a sharp tooth
poorly fitting dentures
hard food
a faulty filling
It’s not always clear what causes mouth ulcers that keep returning, but triggers are thought to include:
stress and anxiety
hormonal changes – some women develop mouth ulcers during their monthly period
eating certain foods – such as chocolate, spicy foods, coffee, peanuts, almonds, strawberries, cheese, tomatoes and wheat flour
toothpaste containing sodium lauryl sulphate
stopping smoking – when you first stop smoking, you may develop mouth ulcers
Your genes are also thought to have a role. Around 40% of people who keep getting mouth ulcers report that it runs in their family.
Medical conditions
Mouth ulcers can sometimes be caused by certain medical conditions, such as:
viral infections – including the
cold sore virus
,
chickenpox
, and
hand, foot and mouth disease
vitamin B12
or
iron deficiency
crohn’s disease
– a long-term condition that causes inflammation of the lining of the digestive system
coeliac disease
– a common digestive condition where a person has an adverse reaction to gluten
reactive arthritis
– a condition that causes inflammation in various places in the body, usually as a reaction to an infection
weakened immune system – for example, due to
HIV
or
lupus
behçet’s disease – a rare and poorly understood condition that also causes swelling of the blood vessels
Medications and treatments
Mouth ulcers can sometimes be caused by certain medications or treatments, such as:
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) – such as
ibuprofen
nicorandil – a medication sometimes used to treat angina
beta-blockers
– used to treat conditions such as angina, high blood pressure and abnormal heart rhythms
a side effect of
chemotherapy
or
radiotherapy
– this is known as mucositis
Is it mouth cancer?
In a few cases, a long-lasting mouth ulcer can be a sign of
mouth cancer
. If mouth cancer is detected early, the chances of a complete recovery are good.
Regular dental check-ups
are the best way to detect the early signs.
Source:
NHS 24