Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/myalgic-encephalomyelitis-me-or-chronic-fatigue-syndrome-cfs/

---

Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) or chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a long term (chronic) neurological condition. It affects many body systems, most commonly, the nervous and immune systems.
ME/CFS affects more women than men. It can affect children and adults of all ages and from all ethnic groups. It does not go away with sleep or rest and affects everyday life. It can sometimes be diagnosed as post viral fatigue syndrome (PVFS).
Symptoms of ME/CFS
The symptoms of ME/CFS can be different for everyone. There may be times when your symptoms improve and you’ll be able to do some everyday activities. At other times, symptoms may get worse, affecting your daily life. Not everyone will experience all of the symptoms.
If you experience new symptoms, talk to your GP or specialist as the new symptoms may be unrelated to ME/CFS.
If you have periods, you may find your symptoms get worse at different times during your menstrual cycle.
Common symptoms of ME/CFS
There are 4 main symptoms of ME/CFS.
Fatigue
ME/CFS can cause debilitating fatigue that is:
made worse by activity
not caused by excessive cognitive, physical, emotional or social exertion
not significantly relieved by rest
Post-exertional malaise
Post exertional malaise (PEM) is where symptoms get worse even after little physical or mental activity.
If you have PEM you might find symptoms get worse hours or days after the activity. You might find your symptoms are not in proportion to the amount of activity that has been done.
It can take a long time to recover from PEM. The symptoms might last hours, days, weeks or longer.
Sleep
You might wake up feeling unrefreshed after sleep. You might also experience sleep disturbance.
You might:
feel exhausted
feel flu-like and stiff on waking
experience broken or shallow sleep
have an altered sleep pattern
experience hypersomnia (feel sleepy during the day)
Brain fog
ME/CFS can cause cognitive difficulties, sometimes described as ‘brain fog’.
This can include:
problems finding words or numbers
difficulty in speaking, slowed responsiveness,
short-term memory problems
difficulty concentrating or multitasking
Other symptoms of ME/CFS
Simple physical or mental activities, or combinations of activities, can leave people with ME/CFS feeling completely exhausted. It can also lead to an increase in other symptoms through PEM.
Other symptoms of ME/CFS include:
feeling generally unwell
pain
poor temperature control
dizziness
being very sensitive to light and sound
nausea
loss of appetite
muscle pain (myalgia)
You might experience frustration,
anxiety
, low mood and
depression
because of the impact of the condition on your life. This does not mean that ME/CFS is a mental health condition.
Read more about the symptoms of ME/CFS
What causes ME/CFS?
Further research is needed to confirm what causes ME/CFS. There might be various factors involved and there may be a number of different types.
ME/CFS may appear suddenly or more slowly over time.
It may be triggered by:
infection
trauma
surgery
stressful major life events
In some cases, there may be no identifiable trigger.
Diagnosing ME/CFS
There’s no single test to detect ME/CFS.
ME/CFS might be diagnosed when people experience the 4 main symptoms of ME/CFS persistently over a minimum of 6 weeks for adults and 4 weeks in children and young people.
The earlier the illness is recognised, the sooner you can get help to manage your symptoms. Many people with ME/CFS find it helps to keep a diary of their symptoms to take to their GP or specialist.
Your GP will usually:
do a physical and mental examination to rule out other conditions
ask about recent travel, tick or insect bites, unusual infections, and drug and alcohol use
review current medication
arrange tests
They may be able to make a diagnosis after 3 months of seeing a pattern of symptoms. Anyone suspected of having ME/CFS should be considered for routine blood tests to identify other possible illnesses. More investigation may be needed if the diagnosis remains in doubt.
Some people with ME/CFS also have another long-term condition and it’s important that you talk to your GP about how to manage the symptoms.
Treatment for ME/CFS
Although there’s no cure for ME/CFS, there are ways to help manage your symptoms.
Because of the complexity of the illness different things work for different people. Your GP may be able to support you through managing your individual symptoms.
To decide what treatment is right for you, you should look at the evidence, including published research and patient surveys. Make sure you fully understand what the treatment involves before you make a decision. You have the right to decline any treatment option you do not feel comfortable with.
Your GP may suggest some of the following treatment options.
Management of medicines
Your GP may suggest reviewing and changing the medicines you take. They’ll consider other conditions you may already be receiving treatment for alongside ME/CFS symptoms that need to be treated.
Your GP may also need to consider the combined impact of medication for symptoms and managing other conditions. This is important because sensitivity to medicine is a feature of ME/CFS.
Dietary advice
If it’s difficult to eat the right balance of nutrients due to loss of appetite and food intolerances, speak to your GP for advice.
Disability support advice
Your GP may work with you or refer you to another therapist to suggest aids, activities or support that can help you to recover or adjust.
Pacing advice
Pacing yourself involves stopping activities before you feel the impact so that you have energy in reserve. It’s easy to do too much on a good day and then feel the impact later.
Balancing periods of activity and rest and noticing what activities demand most from you, can allow you to reduce the number of episodes of PEM.
It can take time to change your habits and stop doing something even while things are going well. However, doing this is key to managing your condition in the long term.
Counselling
Counselling can support you to adjust to the impact ME/CFS can have on your life. This does not mean that the condition itself is psychological.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
CBT can help some people with ME/CFS manage their symptoms. It can sometimes be used to help changes in mood that can come with having a long-term condition.
CBT should only be delivered by a healthcare professional with the right training and experience in CBT for ME/CFS.
Alternative and holistic therapies
Alternative or holistic therapies may provide some comfort but be cautious of any method that claims to offer a cure for ME/CFS.
You should discuss any alternative or holistic therapy with your GP before you try it. Until further research is done, no one can be certain whether someone with ME/CFS might benefit from alternative therapies.
Living with ME/CFS
There are some things that you can do for yourself to help you manage your symptoms. Small changes make a difference to your energy and mobility. This is called self-management.
Planning your time
Record what you do so that you can build a picture of what uses more energy and what activities you can ask others to do for you. This will show you if there are patterns of symptoms and when they appear during your day.
Rest and relaxation
This is very important for managing ME/CFS. You may need some support and advice on what that might mean for you in terms of your physical, mental and emotional activities for resting.
Getting support
Being open with people and asking for help when you need it before you’re exhausted is a key approach to managing your condition. Talking about how you’re feeling is important for long term health conditions because of the impact your symptoms have on the way you live your life.
Talk to your GP about emotional support available to you.
How will ME/CFS affect my quality of life?
Not everyone will experience the same symptoms so it’s important not to compare people with ME/CFS. People with ME/CFS can have very different experiences of the condition and how long their symptoms last.
The impact of symptoms can be:
mild
moderate
severe
very severe
As symptoms change over time so does the impact they have on people’s lives.
How long will it last?
Most people with ME/CFS improve over time, although some people do not make a full recovery. It’s also likely there will be periods when symptoms get better or worse. Children and young people with ME/CFS are more likely to recover fully.
Where can I get support?
ME/CFS can have a significant emotional and financial impact on your life. A lack of understanding and awareness about ME/CFS means patients can experience disbelief, and even discrimination.
Information on working, welfare benefits, accessing health and social care and others sources of support for patients and carers are available from
Action for M.E
. They also offer resources and services for children and young people affected by ME/CFS and their families.
Peer support
In some regions of Scotland there are local support groups providing peer support, information and advice.
ALISS
and
Action for ME
can help with signposting to these groups.
Source:
                                        Scottish Government