Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/sexual-and-reproductive/mycoplasma-genitalium-mgen/

---

Mycoplasma genitalium (Mgen)
Mycoplasma genitalium (Mgen) is a bacterial infection. It can affect the cervix, inside the penis (urethra) or the anus.
Symptoms of Mgen
Most people with Mgen don’t notice any symptoms and don’t know they have it.
If you do get symptoms, it’s usually 1 to 3 weeks after having unprotected sex. Some people don’t get symptoms until months later.
If you do develop symptoms, you may experience:
pain when peeing
unusual discharge from the vagina, penis or anus
pain in the lower tummy, bleeding after sex, and bleeding between periods
pain in the testicles
inflammation in the rectum
Sometimes symptoms can disappear after a few days. Even if symptoms go away you may still have the infection and could pass it on.
Testing for Mgen
Most people who have Mgen do not develop any problems and the infection usually clears up without treatment. You will only be tested if you have symptoms and you’ve not tested positive for other
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
.
Contact your local sexual health service if you think you have Mgen and you have symptoms.
What does an Mgen test involve?
The test for Mgen is simple, painless and very reliable. It involves sending a sample from the area of the body thought to be infected to a lab for analysis.
The 2 main ways the sample can be collected are:
using a swab – a small cotton bud is gently wiped over the area that might be infected, like inside the vagina, penis, or inside the anus
a urine sample (if you have a penis) – this is more accurate if it’s at least 1 or 2 hours after you last peed
You may have a swab taken from your anus or throat if you’ve had anal or oral sex.
Treatment for Mgen
Antibiotics
will treat the Mgen infection.
You should avoid having any
type of sex
for 14 days after you and your partners(s) have been treated.
When you have finished your treatment, you’ll only be asked to test again if your symptoms haven’t improved.
If Mgen is left untreated you may pass it on to other sexual partners.
If Mgen is left untreated in women, it can spread to the womb and cause
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
. This is a serious condition that can cause
ectopic pregnancy
and infertility in women.
If men are not treated, the infection may spread to the testicles and cause discomfort. This could affect your fertility.
How Mgen is passed on
Mgen is passed on through unprotected vaginal, anal or sex (sex without a condom). Mgen can also be passed on by sharing sex toys that aren’t washed or covered with a new condom each time they’re used.
Any sexually active person can get Mgen. It’s most common in people under the age of 30.
How to prevent Mgen
The best way to reduce your risk of STIs is to practice
safer sex
. This means using a condom for vaginal, anal and oral sex. Other ways to reduce your risk of STIs include:
using a new condom each time you use sex toys
washing sex toys after each time they’re used
Other STIs
If you’ve been diagnosed with Mgen you should get tested for all STIs including:
gonorrhoea
chlamydia
syphilis
HIV
Find your local sexual health clinic
Source:
Scottish Government