Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/muscular-dystrophy/myotonic-dystrophy/

---

Myotonic dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy is a genetic condition that causes progressive muscle weakness and wasting.
Myotonic dystrophy can affect muscles of movement and often affects the electrical conduction system of the heart, breathing and swallowing muscles, bowels, lens of the eye and brain.
It can cause diabetes and hormonal changes like thyroid problems. Myotonic dystrophy can also affect the reproductive system in both males and females. Some people experience personality and behavioural problems.
In some rare cases it can increase your chance of developing tumours.
Symptoms of myotonic dystrophy
In myotonic dystrophy, smaller muscles like those in the hands, face and jaw and muscles in the neck are usually affected first. Symptoms can appear anytime between birth and old age.
Other symptoms can include:
muscle stiffness (myotonia)
clouding of the eye lens (cataracts)
a slow and irregular heartbeat (cardiac arrhythmia)
slurred speech
dysphagia (problems with swallowing)
bowel problems like diarrhoea, constipation and incontinence
behavioural and personality problems
excessive sleepiness or tiredness
Everyone with myotonic dystrophy will experience different variations and severity of symptoms. It’s likely the symptoms will get worse very slowly. The condition may become worse as it’s passed down through the generations.
If you have a mild form of myotonic dystrophy with little or no symptoms, you might not experience significant disability.
Your heart rate will have to be monitored to check for changes. This is because there’s a risk of the electrical impulses that control your heartbeat travelling too slowly through your heart.
Life expectancy can vary for people with myotonic dystrophy. Many have a normal life expectancy. People with the more severe congenital form present from birth, might die at a very young age.
People whose symptoms begin as a child or teenager might have a shortened life expectancy. Pneumonia, breathing problems or heart problems tend to be the cause of death in many cases of myotonic dystrophy.
You should let any healthcare professionals you see know that you have myotonic dystrophy because it can cause problems with general anaesthesia.
Myotonic dystrophy 2 (DM2)
There are 2 different types of myotonic dystrophy, DM1 and DM2. Type 1 tends to be more severe and is more common than type 2.
DM2 has similar symptoms to DM1. DM2 causes weakness in muscles close to joints (proximal muscles), like in the:
shoulders
hips
Someone with DM2 might experience cataracts or heart problems but they’re usually less severe than with DM1. Facial weakness and myotonia (difficulty relaxing the muscles) is usually mild or not experienced at all.
Causes of myotonic dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy is a dominant inherited MD. It’s normally passed on from one of your parents.
If you have a dominant inherited MD, you only need to inherit the altered gene from one parent to be affected.
This means, if you have a child with an unaffected partner there’s still a 1 in 2 chance your child will develop the condition. Very few cases of myotonic dystrophy occur with no family history of the condition.
A gene mutation (change) within the DMPK gene on chromosome 19 causes myotonic dystrophy type 1.
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 is caused by a gene change in a different gene called the CNBP gene which is found on chromosome 3.
A blood test will usually confirm a diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy.
Some parents or grandparents might have carried a very slight genetic change that never caused any symptoms or that wasn’t ever diagnosed. Normally, careful and thorough study of the whole family will often show more members with the condition.
Read more about the causes of myotonic dystrophy
Treatment for myotonic dystrophy
Although there is not a cure for myotonic dystrophy, there are supportive treatments that can help manage your symptoms.
Heart problems
If you have myotonic dystrophy, you will develop heart problems.
You should have regular electrocardiograms (ECGs) to examine your heart rhythm. You’ll also need to have an echocardiogram.
You’ll see a cardiologist (heart specialist) for further tests and monitoring.
The cardiologist will prescribe medication to help improve your heart function.
You might have a pacemaker or an ICD (implantable cardioverter defibrillator) inserted to help with your heart function. This can be inserted below the skin in your chest.
Medications for muscle stiffness
Your doctor might consider medicines like mexiletine to help with muscle stiffness.
Swallowing problems (dysphagia)
If your dysphagia is mild, it can sometimes be helped by diet and speech therapy. If dysphagia is causing you to lose too much weight, a dietician might suggest you take food supplements.
If your dysphagia is severe there’s a risk of aspiration pneumonia. This can be prevented by using a different method of feeding.
If this is the case, you might need a gastrostomy. This involves a minor operation to pass a tube through the front of the abdomen (tummy) directly into the stomach. This might be a PEG (percutaneous gastrostomy) or a RIG (radiographically inserted gastrostomy).
A gastrostomy ensures you’re getting enough nutrition and hydration. It reduces the chance of aspiration pneumonia and still allows you to swallow small amounts of food and drink if you’re able to. A PEG or RIG can be hidden under clothes.
Hormonal problems
You’ll see an endocrinologist to manage your diabetes or other hormonal problems.
Breathing problems
You might see a respiratory specialist to check your breathing muscles and function.
If your chest muscles become weak, you might need a machine to help with your breathing. This can be particularly helpful while sleeping. It might also help with any daytime fatigue (sleepiness) you’re experiencing.
Bowel problems
You might experience diarrhoea, constipation or incontinence. If you do, you might see a gastroenterologist.
Exercise
Exercise has been proven to help people with myotonic dystrophy.
You might be referred to a specialist for:
physiotherapy to work on muscle strength and flexibility
physical aids like a walking stick, crutches or a wheelchair
occupational therapy to help maintain independence
Palliative care
You might want to consider hospice care to help you or your child cope with their condition. The hospice can offer help like:
counselling
pain management
respite
Read more about palliative care
Source:
Scottish Government