Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/neck-and-back-problems-and-conditions/neck-problems/

---

Neck problems
This information may be useful for those who have a new neck problem.
People who have been diagnosed with a neck condition or have had recent neck surgery should follow the advice of their healthcare professional.
Read about what to do if you’ve had a neck injury
caused by a fall from height or direct blow to the head or neck.
Neck problems can cause a range of symptoms including:
pain and stiffness (that can sometimes spread down your arm)
muscle tightness or spasms
pins and needles or numbness in your arm or hand
clicking and grinding – this is quite common and can sound alarming but is not usually serious
Neck problems can sometimes cause pain in your shoulders, arms and upper back. It can also cause headaches.
In many cases, new or flare-up of long-standing neck problems should begin to settle within 8 weeks without the need to see a healthcare professional.
When to seek help
Speak to your GP urgently if:
you feel clumsiness in your hands, numbness, pins and needles, or weakness that is worsening, in one or both arms
you have problems with your balance or walking since your neck pain started
your neck pain is associated with a severe headache
Phone 111 if your GP practice is closed
Contact your GP if:
you have neck pain and you also feel generally unwell
you have neck pain that starts when you are ill with other problems – like rheumatoid arthritis or cancer
you develop blurred vision, ringing in your ears or dizziness
What causes neck problems?
Neck problems are rarely caused by any serious disease or damage. Many people develop them for no obvious reason.
Some common causes of neck problems are:
an injury, like a fall or car accident (like
whiplash
)
direct trauma
muscle strain or tension
being in the one position too long, like sitting at your desk at work
repeating the same strained movements in work, sports and hobbies
anxiety
and
depression
age-related changes like
cervical spondylosis
What can I do to help my neck problem?
There’s lots you can do to help. This includes:
moving your neck for short periods every hour
avoid staying in one position for too long without moving
continuing your normal daily activities and hobbies, even if you have to do this at a slower pace than normal
using a supportive pillow when in bed
keeping generally active, even if you move slowly at first
Using a collar is not recommended unless its specifically prescribed by your doctor.
Keeping your neck moving is an essential part of your treatment and recovery. This may be challenging at the beginning so just do what you can and try to build it up over time.
Exercises to help with neck problems
Pain treatments
Pain medication can help you move more comfortably, which can help your recovery.
More about taking painkillers
.
Treating with ice or heat
Using heat or ice on your neck can help reduce symptoms. Use a barrier, like a towel, to protect your skin from a burn. Never place ice or heat directly on your skin. Leave a few hours between treatments.
How to avoid hot water bottle burns and scalds – Care of Burns in Scotland
You should stop treating the area with ice or heat if you notice an increase in redness, discolouration or blistering of the skin.
Read more about burns and scalds
Work
It’s recommended you stay at or return to work as quickly as possible during your recovery. This is important and usually the best way to get better. You don’t need to be pain and symptom-free to return to work.
You should speak to your employer to see if you need any workplace adjustments.
Help and support
Following this advice, you should see gradual improvements over time.
You should see the biggest change in your symptoms within the first couple of weeks. Most problems should have improved within 8 weeks.
If your neck problem hasn’t improved within 8 weeks of following this advice, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Find out how to access MSK services in your area.
When dealing with any health condition it’s important to also look after your
mental wellbeing
as this can impact your recovery.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group