Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/norovirus/

---

Norovirus
Norovirus causes
diarrhoea
and
vomiting
and is one of the most common stomach bugs in the UK. It’s also called the ‘winter vomiting bug’ because it’s more common in winter, but you can catch it at any time of the year.
Norovirus can be very unpleasant but usually clears up by itself in a few days.
You can normally look after yourself or your child at home.
Avoid going to your GP, as norovirus can spread to others very easily. Phone your GP practice or NHS 24 on
111
if you’re concerned or need advice.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if you or your child:
vomit blood or have vomit that looks like ground coffee
have green vomit (adults)
have yellow-green or green vomit (children)
might have swallowed something poisonous
have a stiff neck and pain when looking at bright lights
have a sudden, severe headache or stomach ache
Find your nearest A&E
Phone 111 now if:
you’re worried about a baby under 12 months
your child stops breast or bottle feeding while they’re ill
a child under 5 years has signs of
dehydration
– such as fewer wet nappies
you or your child (over 5 years) still have signs of dehydration after using oral rehydration sachets
you or your child keep being sick and cannot keep fluid down
you or your child have bloody diarrhoea or bleeding from the bottom
you or your child have diarrhoea for more than 7 days or vomiting for more than 2 days
Symptoms of norovirus
You’re likely to have norovirus if you experience:
suddenly feeling sick
projectile
vomiting
watery
diarrhoea
Some people also have a slight fever,
headaches
, painful stomach cramps and aching limbs.
The symptoms appear 1 to 2 days after you become infected and typically last for up to 2 or 3 days.
Norovirus symptoms and recovery tips
This video requires Marketing cookies.
Update your consent
.
How is norovirus spread?
Norovirus spreads very easily in public places such as hospitals, nursing homes and schools.
You can catch it if small particles of vomit or stools (poo) from an infected person get into your mouth through:
close contact with someone with norovirus who may breathe out small particles of the virus that you then inhale
touching contaminated surfaces or objects, as the virus can survive outside the body for several days
eating contaminated food, which can happen if an infected person doesn’t wash their hands before preparing or handling food
Norovirus is most infectious from the start of symptoms until 48 hours after all symptoms have stopped. You may also be infectious for a short time before and after this.
You can get norovirus more than once because the virus is always changing and your body is unable to build up long-term resistance to it.
Preventing norovirus
It’s not always possible to avoid getting norovirus, but following the advice can help stop the virus spreading. You should:
stay off work or school until at least 48 hours after the norovirus symptoms have stopped
avoid visiting anyone in hospital during this time
wash your hands frequently and thoroughly with soap and water particularly after using the toilet and before preparing or handling food
be aware alcohol-based hand gels don’t kill the virus
Maintain basic hygiene and cleaning to help stop the spread of norovirus by:
disinfecting any surfaces or objects that could be contaminated, using a bleach-based household cleaner.
washing any items of clothing or bedding that could have become contaminated separately on a hot wash (60°C) to ensure the virus is killed.
not sharing towels and flannels
flushing any poo or vomit in the toilet and cleaning the surrounding area with a bleach-based household cleaner
avoiding eating raw, unwashed food
only eating oysters from a reliable source as they can carry norovirus
What to do if you have norovirus
If you experience sudden diarrhoea and/or vomiting, the best thing to do is to stay at home until you’re feeling better.
There’s no treatment for norovirus, so you have to let it run its course.
You don’t usually need to get medical advice unless there’s a risk of a more serious problem.
To help ease your own or your child’s symptoms drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration.
You need to drink more than usual to replace the fluids lost from vomiting and diarrhoea – as well as water, adults could also try fruit juice and soup.
Avoid giving fizzy drinks or fruit juice to children as it can make their diarrhoea worse. Babies should continue to feed as usual, either with breast milk or other milk feeds.
You can also:
take paracetamol for any fever or aches and pains
get plenty of rest
use special rehydration drinks, available from community pharmacies if you have signs of
dehydration
, such as a dry mouth or dark urine
If you feel like eating, try plain foods, such as soup, rice, pasta and bread.
Babies and young children, especially under a year old, have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated.
When to get medical advice
You don’t normally need to see your GP if you think you or your child has norovirus, as there’s no specific treatment for it.
Antibiotics
won’t help because norovirus is caused by a virus.
Source:
NHS National Services Scotland