Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/nosebleed/

---

Nosebleed
Nosebleeds are not usually a sign of anything serious. You can often treat them at home.
During a nosebleed, blood flows from one or both nostrils. It can be heavy or light. It can last from a few seconds to 15 minutes or more.
How to stop a nosebleed
To stop a nosebleed:
Sit down at a table, lean forward and firmly pinch the soft part of your nose, just above your nostrils, for at least 10 to 15 minutes.
Lean forward and breathe through your mouth. Spit out any blood that collects in your throat or mouth into a bowl. Do not swallow any blood.
Place an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables covered by a towel on your forehead or back of your neck.
Stay upright or seated, rather than lying down, to reduce the blood pressure in the blood vessels of your nose and help reduce further bleeding.
If the bleeding eventually stops, you won’t usually need to seek medical advice. But in some cases you may need further treatment from your GP or in hospital.
When to get medical advice
Go to A&E or phone 999 if:
the bleeding continues for longer than 20 minutes
the bleeding is heavy and you’ve lost a lot of blood
you’re having difficulty breathing
you’re feeling weak or dizzy
you swallow a large amount of blood that makes you vomit
the nosebleed developed after a serious injury, such as a car crash
Speak to your GP practice if:
you’re taking a blood-thinning medicine (anticoagulant) such as warfarin
you have a condition that means your blood cannot clot properly, such as haemophilia
you have symptoms of
anaemia
such as heart palpitations,
shortness of breath
and a pale complexion
a child under 2 has a nosebleed
you have nosebleeds that come and go regularly
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
What causes nosebleeds?
There are delicate blood vessels in your nose that can become damaged and bleed quite easily.
Common causes of nosebleeds include:
picking your nose
blowing your nose very hard
recently drinking alcohol
a minor injury to your nose
changes in humidity or temperature causing the inside of the nose to become dry and cracked
Occasionally, bleeding can come from the blood vessels deeper within the nose. This can be caused by a blow to the head, recent nasal surgery or hardened arteries (atherosclerosis).
Who gets nosebleeds?
Nosebleeds are fairly common. Most people will get them every now and again. Anyone can get a nosebleed, but they most often affect:
children aged between 2 and 10
elderly people
pregnant women
people who take blood thinning medication such as
aspirin
or anticoagulants, such as warfarin
people with blood clotting disorders, such as haemophilia
Preventing nosebleeds
There are things you can do to prevent nosebleeds.
Do
avoid picking your nose and keep your fingernails short
blow your nose as little as possible and only very gently
keep your home humidified
wear a head guard during activities in which your nose or head could get injured
always follow the instructions that come with nasal decongestants – overusing these can cause nosebleeds
Talk to your GP if you often get nosebleeds and aren’t able to prevent them.
Treatment for nosebleeds
If you see your GP or go to hospital with a nosebleed, you’ll be assessed to find out how serious your condition is and what’s likely to have caused it. This may involve:
looking inside your nose
measuring your pulse and blood pressure
carrying out
blood tests
asking about any other symptoms you have
If needed, your doctor will discuss additional treatments with you. For example, ointments for your nose, cautery to seal blood vessels in your nose or nasal packing may be required.
Source:
ENT Scotland