Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/nutritional/obesity/

---

Obesity
Obesity is a chronic condition. Having obesity means you have too much body fat which could cause risks to your health.
Causes of obesity
Obesity is a complex condition that has more than one cause. Obesity and overweight is caused when extra calories are stored in your body as fat.
Obesity is becoming a more common problem. This is because the environment you live in makes it hard for you to make healthy food choices. It also makes physical activity difficult. Some things that can contribute to obesity and overweight are:
the cost of healthy food
the cost of exercise
time pressures
where we live
There are also some underlying health conditions that can contribute to weight gain. These include:
an
underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism)
, where your thyroid gland doesn’t produce enough hormones
Cushing’s syndrome, a rare condition that causes the body to produce too much steroid hormone
If conditions like these are treated and diagnosed, they won’t be as much of barrier to you losing weight.
Genetics can also be a cause of obesity as your genes can affect how your body stores and uses fat. There are still things you’ll be able to do, though, to try to maintain a healthy weight.
Diagnosing obesity
The most common way to tell if you’re at risk of obesity is by calculating your body mass index (BMI). Measuring your waist to height ratio can also be helpful.
Body Mass Index (BMI)
BMI is widely used as a simple way of finding out whether a person is a healthy weight for their height.
For most white adults, having a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 means your weight is in a healthy range. A person with a BMI of 25 to 29.9 would be in the overweight range. Someone with a BMI of over 30 is considered to be have obesity.
Health risks can begin at 23 and at a higher risk from 27.5 for people who have these family backgrounds:
Asian
Chinese
Middle Eastern
Black African
African-Caribbean
Waist to height ratio
If your BMI is below 35 it can also be useful to measure your waist to height ratio. This helps you understand if you’re carrying too much weight around your tummy.
Ideally your waist size should be less than half your height.
More information on BMI and waist to height ratio
Diagnosing obesity in children
Diagnosing obesity in children and young people under 18 is slightly different. BMI measurements alone are not suitable. It’s difficult to measure at home.
Your healthcare professional may want to do other tests and check their overall health.
Speak to your child’s healthcare professional if you’re worried about their weight.
Treating obesity
The most important ways of treating obesity are to:
eat a healthy, reduced-calorie diet
exercise regularly
To do this you can:
eat a balanced, calorie-controlled diet as recommended by your health care professional
try to be more active — any increase in your current activity levels will help towards you achieving a health weight
Your GP may also recommend you join your
local health board’s weight management programme
. These are designed to help you move towards being a healthy weight.
They can also provide support for weight-related health conditions like:
type 2 diabetes
cardiovascular disease (CVD)
More information on how to lose weight safely
Weight loss medicines
You may also need medicines that can help with weight loss. There are a number of different types of medications available that can help you lose weight. The ones that have been proven to be safe and effective and are used by the NHS are:
semaglutide
liraglutide
tirzepatide
orlistat
Semaglutide, liraglutide and tirzepatide
Semaglutide, liraglutide and tizepatide work in different ways to help you achieve a healthy weight.
More information on weight loss medications
Orlistat
Orlistat works by reducing the amount of fat you absorb during digestion. Your GP will know whether orlistat is right for you.
More information on orlistat
Weight loss surgery
Weight loss surgery is sometimes used to treat people who are living with complex obesity. It’s also known as metabolic and bariatric surgery.
Read more about weight loss surgery
Treating obesity in children
If your child has obesity, treatments include:
making their diet healthier
making sure they get more exercise
It can be hard to do this, but, there are things you can do.
The amount of calories your child should eat each day will depend on their age and height. Your GP should be able to advise you about a how many calories they should eat in a day. They may also be able to refer you to your local family healthy lifestyle programme.
Read more about the physical activity guidelines for children and young people
Your child may be referred to a specialist in childhood obesity if:
they develop an obesity-related complication
there’s an underlying condition which is causing their obesity
The specialist will recommend which treatment options would be right for them.
Conditions related to obesity
There are a range of conditions that are related to obesity and excess weight around your tummy. These include:
type 2 diabetes
cardiovascular disease
fatty liver disease
stroke
obstructive sleep apnoea
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
and
infertility
some types of
cancer
, such as breast cancer and bowel cancer
depression
low self-esteem
People with obesity may be more likely to also have eating disorders like:
binge eating disorder
avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID)
Source:
Public Health Scotland