Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/obsessive-compulsive-disorder-ocd/

---

Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental health condition. It causes you to have obsessive thoughts and carry out compulsive activity. This can be distressing and can have a big impact on your life. Treatment can help you keep it under control.
Symptoms of OCD
OCD affects people in different ways. It usually causes a particular pattern of thought and behaviour.
This pattern has 4 main steps:
Obsession – where an intrusive, distressing thought, image or urge repeatedly enters your mind.
Anxiety – the obsession causes a feeling of intense anxiety or distress.
Compulsion – repetitive behaviours or mental acts that you feel driven to perform although you may recognise them as senseless or pointless.
Temporary relief – the compulsive behaviour brings temporary relief, but the obsession and anxiety return, causing the cycle to begin again.
Speak to your GP practice if:
obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviours are affecting your daily life
you’re not looking after yourself
you’re finding it hard to manage any responsibilities you have
Find out how to get urgent help for your mental health
Obsessive thoughts
Almost everyone has unpleasant or unwanted thoughts at some point in their life. This might be a concern that you’ve forgotten to lock the door or that you might get a disease from touching other people. It could be sudden unwelcome violent or offensive mental images.
Most people are able to put these types of thoughts and concerns into context. They can then carry on with their day-to-day life. They do not repeatedly think about worries they recognise as senseless or excessive.
If you have persistent and unwanted thoughts that dominate your thinking, you may have developed an obsession.
Some common obsessions that affect people with OCD include:
fear of deliberately harming yourself or others – for example, fear you may attack someone, even though this isn’t in your nature
fear of harming yourself or others by accident – for example, a fear you may set the house on fire by leaving the cooker on
fear of contamination by disease, infection or an unpleasant substance
a need for symmetry or orderliness – for example, you may feel the need to ensure all the tins in your cupboard face the same way
Compulsive behaviour
Compulsions happen as a way of trying to reduce or prevent the harm of the obsessive thought. However, this behaviour is either excessive or not connected at all.
For example, a person who fears that they’ll become contaminated with dirt and germs may wash their hands repeatedly. Or someone with a fear of causing harm to their family may have the urge to repeat an action many times to try to ‘neutralise’ the thought of harm. This type of compulsive behaviour is particularly common in children with OCD.
Most people with OCD realise that such compulsive behaviour is irrational. They might know it makes no logical sense, but they cannot stop acting on their compulsion.
Not all compulsive behaviours will be obvious to other people.
Conditions related to OCD
Some people with OCD may also have or develop other mental health problems, including:
depression
eating disorders
generalised anxiety disorder
a hoarding disorder
People with OCD and severe depression might also have
suicidal
feelings.
What causes OCD?
The exact cause of OCD is not known. There are some factors that could make a person more likely to have OCD.
These factors might include:
genetics
life events
personality traits
chemical differences in the brain
Diagnosing OCD
Diagnosis and treatment can help to reduce the impact of OCD on your day-to-day life. You should speak to your GP if you think you have OCD.
Many people do not tell their GP about their symptoms because they feel ashamed or embarrassed. They may also try to disguise their symptoms from family and friends.
If you have OCD, you should not feel ashamed or embarrassed. Like
diabetes
or
asthma
, it’s a long-term health condition, and it’s not your fault you have it.
Your GP will probably ask you a series of questions to see if it’s likely you have OCD.
If the results of the initial screening questions suggest you have OCD, the severity of your symptoms will be assessed. Either your GP or a mental health professional will carry out the assessment.
It’s important you’re open and honest. Accurate and truthful responses will ensure you receive the most appropriate treatment.
If you think someone you know may have OCD, it’s a good idea to:
talk to them carefully about your concerns
suggest they speak to their GP
Treatment for OCD
Treatment for OCD depends on the how much the condition is affecting your daily life.
The 2 main treatments are:
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
medication
If your OCD has a severe impact on your daily life, you’ll usually be referred to a specialist mental health service. You’ll likely receive a combination of CBT and a course of antidepressants.
Children with OCD are usually referred to a healthcare professional with experience of treating OCD in children.
It can take several months before a treatment has a noticeable effect.
Try a self-help guide for OCD
You could try our OCD self-help guide for mild to moderate symptoms of OCD.
Start our OCD self-help guide
Further treatment
You might have specialist treatment if you’ve tried other options and your OCD is still not under control.
Most people improve after receiving treatment.
OCD Action
have online support groups where you can connect with other people with similar experiences.
Source:
NHS 24