Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/conditions-that-can-affect-multiple-parts-of-the-body/osteoporosis/

---

Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a condition where bones have become less dense (thinner). This makes them fragile and more likely to break. It develops slowly over several years. It’s often only diagnosed when a minor fall or sudden impact causes a bone to fracture or break.
The most common fractures in people with osteoporosis are:
wrist fractures
hip fractures
fractures of the spinal bones (vertebrae)
Fractures can also occur in other bones, like in the arm or pelvis. Rarely, a cough or sneeze can cause a rib fracture, or partial collapse or fracture of one of the bones of the spine.
Osteoporosis isn’t usually painful until a fracture occurs. But, spinal fractures can be a common cause of long-term (chronic) pain.
A fracture is normally the first sign of osteoporosis. But, some older people might develop a stooped (bent forward) posture. This happens when several bones in the spine have fractured. That makes it difficult for your spine to support the weight of your body.
Who is affected by osteoporosis
Osteoporosis affects over 3 million people in the UK. Half of women over 50 years and 1 third of men over 60 years of age will have a low trauma fracture due to osteoporosis.
A low trauma fracture is a fracture that happens from minimal force like:
falling onto your wrist
picking up a bag of shopping
falling from a standing height
Over 500,000 people need hospital treatment every year for fragility fractures. These are caused by osteoporosis. Fragility fractures are fractures that occur from standing height or less.
Causes of osteoporosis
Losing bone density is a normal part of the ageing process. Some people lose bone density much faster than normal. This can lead to osteoporosis and an increased risk of fractures.
Women lose bone quickly in the first few years after the
menopause.
Women are more at risk of osteoporosis than men, particularly if the menopause begins early (before the age of 45).
In most cases, the cause of osteoporosis in men is unknown. The risk of osteoporosis is higher in men with low levels of the male hormone testosterone.
Other hormone-related conditions that can trigger osteoporosis include:
hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid gland)
disorders of the adrenal glands, such as Cushing’s syndrome
disorders of the pituitary gland
hyperparathyroidism (overactivity of the parathyroid glands)
Other risk factors
Other factors thought to increase the risk of osteoporosis and broken bones include:
a family history of osteoporosis
a parental history of hip fracture
a
body mass index (BMI)
of 19 or less
long-term use of oral
corticosteroids
which can affect bone strength
having an eating disorder, such as
anorexia
or
bulimia
heavy drinking and smoking
rheumatoid arthritis
Coeliac disease
and
Crohn’s disease
which means people have difficulty digesting or absorbing nutrients from food
some medications used to treat
breast cancer
and
prostate cancer
which affect hormone levels
long periods of inactivity, such as long-term bed rest
You can read more about
who’s at risk of osteoporosis and broken bones
on the
Royal Osteoporosis Society website
.
Diagnosing osteoporosis
Risk assessment tools
If your doctor suspects you have osteoporosis, they can make an assessment using an online programme, like
FRAX
or Q-Fracture.
If you’re between 40 and 90, these tools help to predict your risk of fracture in the hip, spine, shoulder or forearm.
Both the public and healthcare professionals can use the FRAX tool.
DXA scan
Your doctor may also refer you for a DXA (DEXA) scan to measure your bone mineral density. It’s a painless procedure that takes 5 to 10 minutes, depending on the part of the body being scanned.
Your bone density can be compared to that of a healthy young adult. The difference is calculated as a standard deviation (SD) and is called a T score.
Your score will tell you if your bone density is normal, if you have osteopenia or if you have osteoporosis. Your doctor can explain this with your results.
If your bone density is lower, but not by enough to classed as osteoporosis, you might be diagnosed with osteopenia.
Treating osteoporosis
Treatment for osteoporosis includes:
treating and preventing fractures
taking medication to strengthen bones
The decision about whether you need treatment depends on your risk of fracture.
If you need treatment, your doctor can suggest the safest and most effective treatment plan for you.
Medication for osteoporosis
A number of different medications are used to treat osteoporosis. Your doctor will discuss the treatments available and make sure the medicines are right for you.
Bisphosphonates
Bisphosphonates slow down the rate at which bone is broken down in your body. This maintains bone density and reduces the risk of fracture.
There are a number of different bisphosphonates, including
alendronate
ibandronate
risedronate
zolendronic acid
They’re given as a tablet or injection.
Read the leaflet that comes with your medicine for information about dosage and possible side effects.
Strontium ranelate
Strontium ranelate appears to have an effect on both the cells that break down bone and the cells that create new bone (osteoblasts).
It can be used as an alternative treatment if bisphosphonates are unsuitable. Strontium ranelate is taken as a powder dissolved in water.
The main side effects of strontium ranelate are nausea and
diarrhoea
. A few people have reported a rare severe allergic reaction to the treatment. If you develop a skin rash while taking strontium ralenate, stop taking it and speak to your doctor immediately.
Selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERMs)
SERMs are medications that have a similar effect on bone as the hormone oestrogen. They help to maintain bone density and reduce the risk of fracture, particularly of the spine.
Raloxifene is the only type of SERM that’s available for treating osteoporosis. It’s taken as a tablet every day.
Side effects associated with raloxifene include:
hot flushes
leg cramps
a potential increased risk of
blood clots
Parathyroid hormone analogue (teriparatide)
Parathyroid hormone is produced naturally in the body. It regulates the amount of calcium in bone.
Parathyroid hormone treatments (human recombinant parathyroid hormone or teriparatide) are used to stimulate cells that create new bone (osteoblasts). You inject it yourself daily.
While other medication can only slow down the rate of bone thinning, parathyroid hormone can increase bone density. However, it’s only used in a small number of people whose bone density is very low and when other treatments aren’t working.
Nausea and vomiting are common side effects of the treatment. Parathyroid hormone treatments should only be prescribed by a specialist.
Romosozumab
Romosozumab is a type of medication called a monoclonal antibody. You inject it yourself every month for 12 months. It helps the cells that build bone whilst slowing the cells that breakdown bone.
It’s suitable for you if you have severe osteoporosis with a high risk of further fractures.
Calcium supplements
Calcium is the main mineral found in bone. Having enough calcium as part of a
healthy, balanced diet
helps keep bones healthy.
For most healthy adults, the recommended amount of calcium is 700 milligrams (mg) of calcium a day. Most people should be able to get this from a varied diet that contains good sources of calcium.
However, if you have osteoporosis you may need more calcium, which will usually be in the form of supplements. Ask your GP for advice about taking calcium supplements.
Vitamin D supplements
You need vitamin D to help your body absorb calcium. There aren’t many foods that contain vitamin D, so it’s difficult to get enough from diet alone. A main source of vitamin D is sunlight.
More information on Vitamin D
Hormone replacement therapy
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
is a treatment used to relieve symptoms of the menopause.
HRT can also help to maintain bone density and reduce the risk of fracture during treatment.
However, HRT isn’t specifically recommended for treating osteoporosis and it isn’t often used for this purpose. When prescribed for this purpose, it is used around the time of the menopause for up to 5 years.
Read the leaflet that comes with your medicine for information about dosage and possible side effects.
Testosterone treatment
In men, testosterone treatment can be useful when osteoporosis is caused by low levels of testosterone.
Preventing osteoporosis
Your genes are responsible for determining your height and the strength of your skeleton, but lifestyle factors such as diet and exercise influence how healthy your bones are.
If you’re at risk of developing osteoporosis, you should take steps to help keep your bones healthy. This includes:
taking
regular exercise
healthy eating
– including foods rich in
calcium
and
vitamin D
making lifestyle changes – like
stopping smoking
and
reducing how much alcohol you drink
Read more about
healthy bones
on the Royal Osteoporosis Society website.
Living with osteoporosis
If you’re diagnosed with osteoporosis, there are things you can do to
reduce your chances of a fall
like:
removing hazards from your home `
having regular
eye examinations
and hearing tests
More information on preventing falls
To help you recover from a fracture, you can try using:
hot and cold treatments like warm baths and cold packs
TENS unit – where a small battery-operated device is used to reduce pain by stimulating the nerves
relaxation techniques
Speak to your GP or nurse if you’re worried about living with a long-term condition. They can help to answer any questions you have.
You may also find it helpful to talk to a trained counsellor or psychologist, or other people with the condition.
The
Royal Osteoporosis Society
can put you in touch with
local support groups
.
Source:
Scottish Society for Rheumatology