Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/arm-shoulder-and-hand-problems-and-conditions/osteoarthritis-of-the-hand/

---

Osteoarthritis of the hand
This information is intended for those who have been diagnosed with osteoarthritis of the hand (also known as OA hand).
Talk to a healthcare professional for assessment and diagnosis if you are experiencing new or ongoing symptoms.
Read more about self-managing wrist, hand and finger problems
What is Osteoarthritis?
Osteoarthritis, (also known as OA), is caused by changes in the cartilage that cover the ends of the bones within the joints. The cartilage becomes thin and rough, and can make movement of the joints difficult.
OA can also develop after trauma to the affected joint.
Most people will be able to control the symptoms of OA so that it doesn’t interfere with normal activities.
Read more about osteoarthritis
What are the symptoms of osteoarthritis of the hand?
Symptoms vary from person to person. OA can affect the joints in your:
wrists
fingers
thumb
hands
The index, middle fingers and thumb are the most commonly affected. The joint at the base of the thumb can also be affected and occasionally the wrist joint too.
Other common symptoms include:
loss of hand and wrist movement and strength
reduced ability to grip, twist or pinch
changes to the shape of your fingers and thumbs
appearance of small bumps, called nodules, on your fingers and thumbs
Read more from Arthritis UK about osteoarthritis
How is osteoarthritis of the hand diagnosed?
If you have ongoing pain and reduced function in your hand, it’s a good idea to speak to a healthcare professional. They can advise if you need further testing or treatment, or if you can manage the symptoms yourself.
If you visit a healthcare professional, they’ll start by asking questions about your hand issue. They’ll then carry out a physical examination. This may include checking your range of movement and strength.
You may need to have a further examination to rule out other possible health conditions.
Treating and managing osteoarthritis of the hand
There are a number of ways to manage the symptoms of OA hand.
Arthritis affects everyone in a different way. Symptoms can change from day to day. There are many ways to maintain a good quality of life when living with arthritis.
Arthritis UK has everyday tips for living with arthritis
Fatigue is a common symptom of arthritis. It can make other symptoms like pain and joint stiffness feel worse
Arthritis UK has information on managing fatigue
Positioning
There are a number of ways to change the way you use your hands while doing common tasks. Changing your hand position can help:
make tasks easier
reduce pressure in the area
reduce pain
Arthritis UK have information on how to look after your joints
Exercise
It’s important to keep the joints moving and strong. This may help reduce pain and inflammation.
Exercises can help to improve your hand posture. They may also make it easier to do your day-to-day activities.
Read more about exercises that can help with the symptoms of OA hand
Splints and supports
A splint may be advised by your healthcare professional. Splints help support the thumb or fingers to manage your symptoms.
You may need to use a splint during the day when carrying out repetitive activities. It’s not advised to wear this all the time. You may only need to use this for a few weeks in order to settle the symptoms.
Speak to your healthcare professional to get more information about splints and supports for your hand.
Arthritis UK have information on splinting
Aids and adaptations
Versus Arthritis have advice on
using aids or adaptations to help with activities
.
Managing pain
Pain medication can help you move more comfortably, which can help your recovery.
One of the most effective painkillers for this condition is
an ibuprofen gel
. This is rubbed into the skin.
Paracetamol can also be helpful. Stronger pain killers like opioids increase the risk of harmful side effects.
More about taking painkillers
If your pain remains at a high level you should discuss your options with a healthcare professional.
Using heat
It can be helpful to use heat to manage your pain for short periods of time.
You could:
soak your hands in warm water
use hand warmers
wear gloves
If using warm water, ensure the water is not too hot to avoid a scald or burn.
Watch a video on contrast bathing
, which reduces swelling by moving your affected hand between warm and cold water.
You should not use heat as a treatment for OA hand if you have issues with:
circulation
sensation
increased swelling
If you have signs of a
scald or burn
:
stop treating the area with heat
talk to a medical professional
Corticosteroid injections
Occasionally corticosteroid injections are considered, if other treatment options aren’t working.
Corticosteroids are medicines that help reduce pain and inflammation. They are used to help with the pain in the short term. There is no evidence of long-term benefit.
Read more about corticosteroids
Surgery
In some cases, surgery may be an option if all other treatment options have been tried.
If you’re considered for surgery, your surgeon will go through the benefits and potential complications with you.
Examples of this include:
joint replacement
joint fusion
Work
OA hand can sometimes mean you need to take some time off work to help recovery. How long you’re off will depend on the nature of your condition and your role at work.
You do not need to be symptom-free before you consider returning to work. Continuing to go to work, or returning to work as soon as is possible for you, will help your recovery. Gradually getting back to your normal daily activities can help to build up your strength and stamina levels.
Read more about work and arthritis from Arthritis UK
Help and support
Following this advice, your symptoms should become easier to manage.
Talk to a healthcare professional if you’re struggling to manage these symptoms on your own.
Find out how to access MSK services in your area
When dealing with any health condition it’s important to also look after
your mental wellbeing
as this can impact your recovery.
Source:
MSK Expert Panel