Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/panic-disorder/

---

Panic disorder
Panic disorder is where you keep having panic attacks, often for no obvious reason.
Everyone experiences feelings of anxiety and panic at certain times during their lifetime. It’s a natural response to stressful or dangerous situations.
For someone with panic disorder, feelings of anxiety, stress and panic happen regularly and at any time.
Symptoms of a panic disorder
The symptoms of a panic attack can be very frightening and distressing. Symptoms tend to occur suddenly, without warning and often for no obvious reason.
As well as overwhelming feelings of anxiety, a panic attack can also cause other symptoms, including:
a sensation that your heart is beating irregularly (
palpitations
)
sweating
trembling
hot flushes
chills
shortness of breath
a choking sensation
chest pain
nausea
dizziness
feeling faint
numbness or pins and needles
dry mouth
a need to go to the toilet
ringing in your ears
a feeling of dread or a fear of dying
a churning stomach
a tingling sensation in your fingers
shivering
shaking
The physical symptoms of a panic attack are unpleasant. You might also have feelings of fear and terror.
For this reason, people with panic disorder might start to fear the next attack. This creates a cycle of living in ‘fear of fear’ and adds to the sense of panic.
Speak to your GP practice if:
panic is affecting your daily life
you’re not looking after yourself
you’re finding it hard to manage any responsibilities you have
Find out how to get urgent help for your mental health
Sometimes, the symptoms of a panic attack can be so intense they can make you feel like you’re having a
heart attack
or you’re dying.
Although panic attacks can be frightening, they don’t cause any physical harm. People with panic disorder sometimes learn to recognise this ‘heart attack sensation’. They might become more aware of how to control their symptoms.
Most panic attacks last for 5 to 20 minutes. Some attacks can last up to an hour. However, it’s likely that in these cases one attack occurred straight after another or high levels of anxiety kept going after the first attack.
What causes panic disorder?
The exact cause of panic disorder isn’t fully understood.
It’s thought that panic disorder is probably caused by a combination of physical and psychological factors like:
traumatic life experiences like bereavement
having a close family member with panic disorder
an imbalance of neurotransmitters (chemical messengers) in the brain
over-breathing or hyperventilating
catastrophic thinking
Diagnosing panic disorder
Everyone who has panic disorder will experience panic attacks.
However, not everyone who has panic attacks has panic disorder.
Panic disorder will only be diagnosed if you experience recurring and unexpected panic attacks. Also, if the attacks are followed by at least one month of continuous worry or concern about having further attacks.
Talking to your GP
Your GP will ask you to describe the symptoms you’ve been experiencing. They’ll also ask you how often your symptoms occur and in what situations.
It’s important to tell your GP about how you’ve been feeling and how your symptoms have affected you.
Although it can sometimes be difficult to talk about your feelings and personal life, try not to feel anxious or embarrassed.
Your GP needs to understand your symptoms to make the right diagnosis. This’ll help them recommend the most appropriate treatment for you.
Management of panic disorder
Treatment aims to reduce the number of panic attacks you have and ease your symptoms.
Talking therapies and medicine are the main treatments for panic disorder. You may need one of these treatments or a combination of both. No single treatment works for everyone. You may need to try different treatments before finding one that works for you.
Talking therapies
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
is used to treat panic disorder. It involves having regular sessions with a therapist.
They can teach you ways of changing your behaviour to help you manage an attack.
Medication
If you and your doctor think it might be helpful, you may be prescribed medication.
If you want to stop taking any medication you’ve been prescribed you should discuss this with your GP before stopping.
Referral to a specialist
If your symptoms do not improve after CBT, medicine and connecting with a support group, your GP may refer you to a mental health specialist. You might see a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist.
The specialist will carry out an assessment and create a treatment plan to help you manage your symptoms.
Things you can try yourself
What you can do during a panic attack
The next time you feel a panic attack coming on:
stay where you are, if possible
try to breathe slowly and deeply
remind yourself that you’re not in danger and the attack will pass
Fighting a panic attack can often make it worse. Instead, during a panic attack, reassure yourself by accepting that the attack isn’t life-threatening. Focus on the fact that the attack will eventually end and try your best to let it pass.
Read more about how to deal with panic and anxiety
Self help for panic
Try our self help guide. It’s based on cognitive behavioural therapy and aims to help you:
understand panic and panic attacks
understand symptoms of panic attacks and their purpose
cope with panic attacks and make them less severe
Start our panic self help guide
Support groups
Support groups can provide information and advice to help you manage your panic disorder. They’re also a good way of meeting other people who’ve had similar experiences.
You might find the following links useful:
Mind: understanding anxiety and panic attacks
SAMH – Anxiety and panic attacks
Young Scot’s AyeFeel page all about anxiety
NoPanic
Ask your GP about support groups for panic disorder near you.
Find anxiety services in your area
Source:
NHS 24