Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/healthy-living/pregnancy-and-maternity/pelvic-girdle-pain/

---

Pelvic girdle pain
Pelvic girdle pain (PGP) is very common during pregnancy. It’s not harmful to your baby, but it can be very painful and impact your daily life.
You don’t need to suffer with PGP. There are ways to manage PGP symptoms that are safe at any stage during or after your pregnancy. There are things that you can do yourself that may help you to feel better. However, if you’re in pain you should speak to your midwife, GP, or healthcare professional as early as you can.
Speak to your midwife or GP if:
You have pelvic pain and:
it’s worse when you move around
it hurts to get in or out of the car or when turning over in bed
it’s painful using the stairs
Symptoms of pelvic girdle pain
Some people may only experience mild symptoms but for others they may be much more severe. Common symptoms include:
pain in the lower part of your tummy between your hip bones, lower back, hips and legs
clicking or grinding in your pelvic area
You might also feel pain that gets worse when you move, for example when you:
are walking
are getting in and out of the car
climbing the stairs
getting dressed
getting in or out of the bath
rolling over in bed
moving your thighs apart (for example, during sex)
PGP can happen at any stage of your pregnancy and can get worse over the course of your pregnancy. It can be more likely to happen if you have:
had back problems in the past
previously injured your pelvis
a physically demanding job
If you experience PGP and don’t treat your symptoms, it’s more likely you’ll have PGP with any future pregnancies.
The emotional impact of living with pain can also be very difficult. Particularly if
you experienced symptoms of anxiety and depression before your pregnancy
.
Further information on living with pain and mental health and wellbeing
Diagnosing pelvic girdle pain
Early diagnosis and treatment may help your relieve your pain and stop your symptoms from getting worse. It will help you get back to doing everyday activities and avoid long term discomfort.
Speak to your midwife, GP, or healthcare professional if you are experiencing pelvic pain. They may want to rule out any other causes of pelvic pain before diagnosing PGP. They may also refer you to a special physiotherapist. Physiotherapy aims relieve or ease pain and improve muscle function.
Treating pelvic girdle pain
There are things that you can do that may help you to manage your PGP symptoms.
Do
stay as active as you can, avoiding things which make your pain worse
rest when you need to, if you can
wear flat, supportive shoes
sit down to get dressed (don’t stand on one leg at a time to put on your pants or trousers)
keep your knees together when turning over in bed or getting in and out of the car
You can also try using a pillow under your bump and between your legs to give you extra support in bed. If possible, you should lie on your less painful side to sleep. You should avoid sleeping on your back from 24 weeks of pregnancy onwards.
You should try to avoid things which may make your symptoms worse.
Don’t
do not sit or stand in one position for more than 30 minutes at a time
do not lift anything heavy, for example heavy shopping
do not use the stairs too often
do not stoop, bend or twist to lift or carry a toddler or baby on one hip
do not sit the floor, sit twisted, or sitt cross-legged
If you can, ask your friends or family for help with everyday activities.
Treatment options
If you’re referred to physiotherapist, they’ll discuss the best treatment options for you. This might include:
exercises to strengthen your abdominal (tummy) and pelvic floor muscles, as well as back and hip muscles
a pelvic support belt to help ease pain, or crutches to help you get around
advice on things you can do at home to bring comfort, like warm baths
advice on coping with the emotional impact of living with pain, which may include relaxation techniques
If severe pain continues, you should speak to your midwife or GP or healthcare professional.
Risks
Pregnancy increases the chances of
developing blood clots in the veins
of your legs compared with women who are not pregnant. It can happen at any time in your pregnancy but the highest risk is just after you have had your baby. It is uncommon and occurs in only 1-2 in 1000 women.
If it’s very difficult to move around and you’re inactive for long periods this could increase your risk of blood clots. Things such as age and lifestyle can also mean you may be more at risk. Your midwife should carry out a risk assessment at your first antenatal booking and again at around 28 weeks of pregnancy. They will explain what this means for you and you can ask any questions.
You should let your midwife, GP or healthcare professional know if you’re finding it difficult to move around. They may recommend you wear special stockings (graduated elastic compression stockings). Some women may be advised by their doctor that they need to have injections of heparin (a medicine which thins the blood). This will help to reduce their risk of blood clots.
Read the
patient information leaflet from the Royal College for Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
.
Labour and giving birth
Your midwife will encourage you to make a birth plan. This let’s you consider your choices and decide what you’d like to happen during the birth. The plan goes into your maternity notes.
If you experience PGP during your pregnancy you’ll still have choice in where and how you choose to birth.
Make sure to note in your birth plan that you have PGP so that the staff supporting you during labour know about your condition. It should include:
the position(s) you find most comfortable, for example on all fours
how far apart you can comfortably have your legs
if you’re choosing a water birth, how easy it is for you to enter and exit the birthing pool
Speak to your midwife if you would like to try out different positions entering the pool.
Water can help you relax during labour. It can help you move about more easily, supports joints and may help you cope better with contractions. If you’re thinking about a birth in water, either at home or in hospital, talk to your midwife.
Further information about planning for birth
After pregnancy
PGP symptoms usually improve in the weeks and months after the end of the pregnancy. However, some women (around 1 in 10) will continue to experience pelvic pain. It’s important that you continue your treatment until your symptoms are better. Take extra care when you move about and aim to become more mobile.
If your pain continues you should seek advice from your GP. They may refer you to a specialist to rule out other causes. This can include hip problems or
joint hypermobility syndrome
.
Source:
Scottish Government