Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/sexual-and-reproductive/pelvic-inflammatory-disease/

---

Pelvic inflammatory disease
British Sign Language (BSL)
|
简体中文
|
Polski
|
Română
|
slovenčina
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is a bacterial infection. It affects the female reproductive system including the womb, fallopian tubes and ovaries.
Symptoms of PID
PID often does not cause any obvious symptoms.
Most symptoms are mild, making it difficult to diagnose.
Symptoms include:
pain around the pelvis or lower tummy
discomfort or pain during sex that is felt deep inside the pelvis
pain when peeing
bleeding between periods or after sex
heavy periods
painful periods
unusual vaginal discharge
Less common symptoms include:
severe tummy pain
a high temperature (fever)
feeling and being sick
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice or local sexual health clinic if:
you have symptoms of PID
you’re worried about your symptoms
Testing for PID
If you think you might have PID, get checked for free by:
booking an appointment at your local sexual health service
contacting your GP practice for an appointment
What does a PID test involve?
There is no single test for diagnosing PID.
Your doctor or nurse will discuss your symptoms before you have an internal examination. This shouldn’t be painful, but you may experience some discomfort.
When your doctor examines you, they’ll look for tenderness in your pelvic region and an abnormal vaginal discharge.
The doctor will usually take swabs from inside your vagina and cervix. These will be sent to a lab for analysis. However, a swab test can’t be relied on to diagnose PID, as some women with PID have a negative swab result.
You may have an ultrasound scan. Scans can identify severe PID but will not show up mild disease. It’s possible to have a normal scan and still have PID.
Treatment for PID
If it’s diagnosed at an early stage, oral antibiotics will treat PID. You’ll probably be given these to take for at least 2 weeks.
In more severe cases, you may be admitted to hospital for observation and treatment with antibiotic injections.
Always see your doctor or nurse if you think you might have PID, as the sooner you are treated, the better. If you’re given treatment, always make sure that you take all of your antibiotics and finish the entire course.
Your partner(s) should also be treated and you should avoid sex until your treatment is completed.
How PID is passed on
Most cases of PID are caused by a bacterial infection that’s spread from the vagina or the cervix to the reproductive organs higher up.
Many different types of bacteria can cause PID. However, most cases are the result of a
chlamydia
or
gonorrhoea
infection.
In some cases, the cause of the infection that leads to PID is unknown. Such cases may be the result of normally harmless bacteria found in the vagina. These bacteria can sometimes get past the cervix and into the reproductive organs.
Complications of PID
If left untreated, PID can cause serious conditions including:
pelvic abscesses
long-term pelvic pain, or pelvic pain that keeps coming back
reduced fertility or infertility
ectopic pregnancy
How to prevent PID
The best way to reduce your risk of STIs is to practice
safer sex
. This means using a condom for vaginal, anal and oral sex.
STIs
If you have been diagnosed with PID you should get tested for all STIs including:
chlamydia
gonorrhoea
syphilis
Find your local sexual health clinic
Source:
Scottish Government