Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/peripheral-neuropathy/

---

Peripheral neuropathy
Peripheral neuropathy develops when the peripheral nerves are damaged. The symptoms experienced depend on which nerves are affected.
In the UK, it’s estimated that almost 1 in 10 people aged 55 or over are affected by peripheral neuropathy.
What are peripheral nerves?
The peripheral nervous system is the network of nerves that lie outside the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord). This includes nerves in the feet and hands.
Peripheral nerves:
transmit sensations like pain and touch
controlling muscles
regulate some body functions like blood pressure
Types of peripheral neuropathy
There are 4 types of peripheral neuropathy:
sensory neuropathy – damage to the nerves that carry sensations like touch, temperature and pain
motor neuropathy – damage to the nerves that control movement
autonomic neuropathy – damage to the nerves that control bodily functions like digestion, bladder function and blood pressure
mononeuropathy – damage to a single nerve outside the central nervous system
Often people have more than 1 type of peripheral neuropathy at the same time.
Symptoms of peripheral neuropathy
Symptoms of peripheral neuropathy can vary depending on which type you have. They can also develop quickly or slowly.
Symptoms of sensory neuropathy
a prickling or tingling sensation in the affected body part
‘pins and needles’ in the affected body part
a burning or sharp pain, usually in the feet
numbness in the affected body part
being less able to feel pain or changes in temperature, particularly in your feet
being more able to feel pain, to the point that even a light touch causes you pain (allodynia)
the loss of balance or co-ordination (sensory ataxia)
Symptoms of motor neuropathy
twitching and muscle cramps
muscle weakness or paralysis that affects 1 or more muscles
thinning (wasting) of your muscles
foot drop (difficulty lifting the front part of your foot) that causes you to trip
Symptoms of autonomic neuropathy
constipation
or
diarrhoea
, particularly at night
feeling sick, bloating and belching
low blood pressure
, which can make you feel faint or dizzy when standing up
rapid heartbeat
problems with the amount you sweat (either too much or too little)
problems with sexual function, like
erectile dysfunction
difficulty fully emptying your bladder
Symptoms of mononeuropathy
The symptoms of mononeuropathy can vary because they depend on which specific nerve has been affected. Example symptoms could include:
pain, weakness or altered sensation your fingers, feet or shins
double vision or other problems with focusing your eyes, sometimes with eye pain
weakness of one side of your face (Bell’s palsy)
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Causes of peripheral neuropathy
Diabetes
(both type 1 and type 2) is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy. This is called diabetic polyneuropathy
Diabetic polyneuropathy
The high blood sugar levels associated with diabetes can damage the nerves, causing diabetes.
Peripheral neuropathy becomes more likely the longer you’ve had diabetes.
Your risk of diabetic polyneuropathy is higher if:
your blood sugar is poorly controlled
you smoke
you regularly consume large amounts of alcohol
you’re over 40 years old
There are many other possible causes of peripheral neuropathy. These can include:
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (the presence of abnormal protein in the blood)
cancers like lymphoma (cancer of the lymphatic system) and multiple myeloma (bone marrow cancer)
low levels of vitamins like
vitamin B12
drinking too much
alcohol
for a long period of time
malnutrition
(poor diet)
some types of
chemotherapy
for cancer, particularly those used for
bowel cancer
,
breast cancer
, lymphoma or myeloma
genetic conditions that cause nerve damage, like Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
some medications when taken for a long time, like metronidazole, nitrofurantoin, phenytoin, amiodarone and thalidomide
physical injury to the nerves
infections like
shingles
,
lyme disease
, diphtheria, botulism and
HIV
hypothyroidism
(an underactive thyroid gland)
chronic
kidney disease
or
liver disease
conditions caused by an overactive immune system, like
rheumatoid arthritis
,
lupus
,
Sjogren’s syndrome
or vasculitis (inflammation of the blood vessels)
rare conditions
like Guillain-Barré syndrome and amyloidosis
exposure to high levels of toxins, like arsenic, lead or mercury
Diagnosing peripheral neuropathy
If you’ve got symptoms of peripheral neuropathy, you should make an appointment with your GP. They’ll ask about your symptoms and may arrange some tests to help find out the underlying cause.
If you’re taking a medication known to cause peripheral neuropathy, your GP may temporarily stop or reduce your dose to see whether your symptoms improve.
Do not stop taking any prescribed medication without checking with your GP or healthcare provider first. You could make yourself very ill.
If your GP isn’t sure what’s causing your peripheral neuropathy, you may be referred to a neurologist. This is a specialist in conditions affecting the nervous system. They may do some further tests.
Generally, the sooner peripheral neuropathy is diagnosed, the better. Early diagnosis gives you the best chance of limiting the damage and preventing further complications.
Speak to your GP practice if:
You have:
pain, tingling or loss of sensation in the feet
loss of balance or weakness
a cut or ulcer on your foot that isn’t getting better
Outlook with peripheral neuropathy
The outlook for peripheral neuropathy varies. It depends on:
the underlying cause
which nerves have been damaged
how severe the damage is
If the underlying cause of your peripheral neuropathy can be treated, it may improve with treatment and time. For example, if your
diabetes
is well controlled, it may stop neuropathy getting worse. You may also find your neuropathy improves.
It may be that the underlying cause of your peripheral neuropathy cannot be treated. In these cases, the damage may be permanent, and may get worse with time.
Complications of peripheral neuropathy
Peripheral neuropathy can cause further complications to your health. Some of these can be severe. They can include:
cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy – when damage to the peripheral nerves cause problems with your heartbeat and blood circulation
diabetic foot ulcers – when damaged to your blood vessels cause wounds to take an unusually long time to heal, leading to further problems
Managing your symptoms
Even if the cause of your peripheral neuropathy cannot be treated, you can get help with managing your symptoms.
Pain
If you’re in pain, you may be prescribed different types of medication. This is because standard painkillers (like ibuprofen and paracetamol) are often not effective at treating nerve pain.
If you’re experiencing pain in a particular area of your body, capsaicin cream may help. Capsaicin is the substance that makes chilli peppers hot. It’s thought to stop the nerves sending pain messages to the brain, making it useful for nerve pain. Menthol cream can have a similar effect.
If your pain only affects a small area of skin, you may be offered a lidocaine plaster. This is a large sticking plaster that contains a local anaesthetic, which is absorbed into the skin the plaster covers.
If topical measures do not work, your GP may consider a neuropathic agent. These include some types of anti-depressants .
Muscle weakness
If you’re struggling with muscle weakness, you may benefit from physiotherapy. It can help improve weakness.
Occupational therapy
can help you find new ways of completing difficult tasks.
If you have foot drop or tripping, orthotics can help with ankle supports.
Excess sweating
If you’re experiencing hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating), you may be offered botulinum toxin (botox) injections. These could help reduce your sweating.
Difficulty emptying your bladder
If you’re struggling to empty your bladder, you may be offered urodynamic studies. Depending on the result, you may be offered medication or
urinary catheterisation
to help you.
Source:
Scottish Government