Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/phobias/

---

Phobias
A phobia is a common type of anxiety disorder.
Many people are afraid of things. Fear only becomes a phobia when you begin to organise your life around avoiding your fear.
If you have a phobia, you’ll have an overwhelming need to avoid all contact with the source of your anxiety. Coming into contact with the thing you’re afraid of will cause you to feel anxiety and/or panic. Sometimes just thinking about it can cause these feelings.
Phobias can be caused by many things, including:
animals
objects
places
situations
If the cause of your phobia is an object or animal that you don’t see regularly, it’s unlikely to affect your day-to-day life. But, if you encounter the cause of your phobia regularly, you may find it very difficult to lead a normal life.
Simple phobias
Simple phobias are fears about specific objects, animals, situations or activities. Some common examples include:
dogs
spiders (arachnophobia)
snakes
enclosed spaces (claustrophobia)
dentists
flying
While some people are able to manage their fears, others will need help and support to tackle the problem.
Complex phobias
Complex phobias can have a bigger impact than simple phobias. This is because they’re often associated with a deep-rooted fear or anxiety about a particular circumstance or situation.
Speaking to a GP about your anxiety may help to identify a complex phobia.
Two common examples of complex phobias are agoraphobia and social phobia.
Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is a fear of being in situations where escape might be difficult, or where help wouldn’t be available if things go wrong.
Agoraphobia often involves a combination of several connected phobias. Someone with agoraphobia may also fear being left alone (monophobia). They might also fear places where they feel trapped (claustrophobia).
This means someone with agoraphobia may find it difficult to:
travel on public transport
visit a shopping centre
leave home (in extreme cases)
Some people feel very apprehensive and anxious if they have to leave their home to visit the shops. Others may feel relatively comfortable travelling a short distance from their home.
Social phobia
If you have social phobia, you may experience fear of:
being in social situations, like weddings
performing in social situations, like public speaking
leaving home because of the risk of meeting people (in extreme cases)
If you have a social phobia, the thought of being seen in public can make you feel very anxious and frightened. These situations can make you feel vulnerable.
Intentionally avoiding meeting people in social situations is a sign of social phobia.
How common are phobias?
Phobias are the most common type of anxiety disorder. In the UK, an estimated 10 million people have phobias. Phobias can affect anyone, regardless of age, sex and social background.
Symptoms of phobias
People with phobias usually need to avoid contact with the thing that causes fear. How far someone with a phobia will go to avoid contact varies.
For example, someone with a fear of spiders (arachnophobia) may not want to touch a spider. Others may not be able to even look at a picture of a spider.
All phobias can limit your daily activities. They can cause severe
anxiety
and
depression
.
Physical symptoms
Panic attacks are common among people with phobias. They can be very frightening and distressing. The symptoms often occur suddenly and without warning.
Read more about panic attacks
What causes phobias?
Phobias usually develop during childhood, adolescence or early adulthood. They often begin after a frightening event or a stressful situation. But, it’s not always clear why some phobias occur.
If people in your family share your phobia, it’s likely that you all learnt it from another family member as children.
Diagnosing phobias
Most people with a phobia are usually fully aware that they have one. Many people live with a phobia without having it formally diagnosed and by taking care to avoid the thing they’re afraid of.
If your phobia is interfering with your day to day life, you may benefit from speaking to your GP. They may refer you to a specialist, like a psychologist, who can help.
Treatment for phobias
Almost all phobias can be successfully treated and cured.
Treating simple phobias
Treating simple phobias involves gradually becoming exposed to what causes your fear. This is known as desensitisation or self-exposure therapy.
Each phobia is different and no single programme will work for everyone. You may decide to get help from a specialist, like a psychologist. You might use your own self-help strategy.
Our mental health self-help guides are based on
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
. They can be helpful for people with anxiety and other mental health issues.
Start the self-help guide for phobias
Treating complex phobias
Treatment for complex phobias often takes longer than for simple phobias. It might involve talking therapies, like counselling, psychotherapy and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Speak to your GP for further information about treating a complex phobia.
Medication
Medication is not usually used to treat phobias.
Source:
NHS 24