Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/coronavirus-covid-19/complications/pims/

---

PIMS
PIMS-TS or PIMS stands for Paediatric Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome temporally associated with COVID-19. It’s also sometimes called MISC-C (Multisystem Inflammatory syndrome in children associated with COVID).
PIMS is a rare complication of coronavirus (COVID-19). It occurs mainly in school-age children, but can occasionally affect infants or young adults.
Most children who catch coronavirus do not develop severe disease.
PIMS is not like other forms of severe coronavirus. Children with PIMS will generally have had only mild symptoms or have had no symptoms at all at the time of their coronavirus infection. Symptoms usually start about 4 to 6 weeks later.
What are the symptoms of PIMS?
All children with PIMS have fever (temperature over 38
0
C) lasting at least 3 to 4 days.
Other common symptoms are:
red rash (spots or blotches) which may be there all the time, or come and go
red eyes (conjunctivitis) which are not sticky or itchy
abdominal pain
which might be severe, like appendicitis
vomiting
and/or
diarrhoea
sore throat
,
cough
,
breathlessness
swollen glands
sore red mouth
swollen hands and feet
headache
dizziness
sleepiness or confusion
How is PIMS diagnosed?
Many other illnesses can cause the same symptoms as PIMS. There’s no specific test for PIMS. Doctors can diagnose PIMS by:
asking about symptoms and how they’ve progressed
examination
doing blood tests and scans which show signs of inflammation
Is there treatment for PIMS?
Although PIMS can make children very sick, there is effective treatment. The vast majority of children make a full recovery.
The most common medicines used are steroids and immunoglobulin. These are given into the vein and reduce inflammation. PIMS can affect the way the heart works, and cause inflammation in other organs. Some children will also need other treatments to help the heart and other body systems.
Speak to your GP if:
Your child has a fever lasting 3 to 4 days and:
is feeling very weak or dizzy
is very sleepy or confused
has a rash and/or red eyes
has severe or worsening abdominal pain
If your GP is closed, phone 111. In an emergency phone 999.
Source:
NHS 24