Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/pleurisy/

---

Pleurisy
Pleurisy is inflammation of the layers that cover the lungs (the pleura). It causes sharp chest pain (pleuritic pain) that gets worse when breathing or coughing.
It can affect people of all ages. People aged 65 years and over are most at risk because they’re more likely to get a
chest infection
.
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
you have pain when breathing in or coughing, particularly if you also have other symptoms, such as coughing up blood or leg swelling
you have severe
chest pain
in the middle of your chest that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
your lips or skin are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
Contact your GP practice urgently if you:
have difficulty breathing – you may be more short of breath than usual
are feeling confused, dizzy, or lightheaded
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
have
heart palpitations
– this may feel like your heart is racing, going too slowly or skipping a beat or like a fluttering feeling in your chest
have a sharp shoulder pain when breathing deeply
have previously had a
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
or a blood clot in the lungs (pulmonary embolism)
take blood thinning medication
are peeing less than usual – this can be a sign of
dehydration
have a very high or low temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or you’re shivering
If your GP is closed, phone 111.
Speak to your GP practice if:
you have breathlessness which is not improving
you have had a
cough
for more than 3 weeks
your symptoms are not improving or they are affecting your daily life
Diagnosing pleurisy
Pleurisy can usually be diagnosed by checking your symptoms. Your GP can listen to your chest to check for sounds that suggest you may have pleurisy.
Further tests may be needed to find the underlying cause and how severe it is. Tests can include:
blood tests
to determine whether you have an infection or an autoimmune condition
chest
X-rays
an
ultrasound scan
a
computerised tomography (CT) scan
a
biopsy
– a small sample of pleural or lung tissue is removed for further testing
Treatment for pleurisy
Treatment for pleurisy depends on the underlying cause.
For example, pleurisy caused by a viral infection will often resolve itself without treatment. However, pleurisy caused by a bacterial infection is usually treated with
antibiotics
. People who are frail or already in poor health may be admitted to hospital.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
, such as
ibuprofen
, are often used to relieve the chest pain.
If excess fluid builds up between the pleural layers, it may need drained to prevent breathing difficulties. This is known as pleural effusion.
What causes pleurisy?
Most cases are the result of a viral infection (such as the
flu
) or a bacterial infection (such as
pneumonia
). Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) can cause pleurisy, especially in hospital patients. MRSA is a type of bacteria with a resistance to a number of commonly used antibiotics.
In rarer cases, pleurisy can be caused by conditions such as a blood clot or
lung cancer
.
Source:
Scottish Government