Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/conditions-that-can-affect-multiple-parts-of-the-body/polymyalgia-rheumatica/

---

Polymyalgia rheumatica
Polymyalgia rheumatica is a condition that causes pain, stiffness and inflammation. This is mostly around the shoulders, neck and hips.
Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica
Polymyalgia rheumatica often causes pain and stiffness. This can affect the shoulders, neck and hips. These symptoms can develop quickly over a few days or weeks. Both sides of the body are usually affected.
The stiffness often feels worse first thing in the morning after you wake up. It usually starts to improve after about 45 minutes as you become more active.
Polymyalgia rheumatica may also cause:
high temperature (fever) and sweating
extreme tiredness (fatigue)
loss of appetite
weight loss
depression
Speak to your GP practice urgently or phone 111 if:
You have been diagnosed with polymyalgia rheumatic and you suddenly develop:
a persistent and severe headache
jaw pain or cramping in your jaw muscles which is worse when you’re eating
pain in your tongue when chewing
If you have been diagnosed with polymyalgia rheumatica and you suddenly develop vision loss or changes in your vision, like double vision, contact an optician immediately or phone 111.
Diagnosing polymyalgia rheumatica
It can take a long time to diagnose polymyalgia rheumatica. You may need different tests to help diagnose it. This is because it shares symptoms with other health conditions that need to be ruled out first.
There’s no specific test for polymyalgia rheumatic. But you should have
blood tests
to look for things like signs of inflammation before starting any corticosteroid treatment.
An
X-ray
or
ultrasound scan
may also be used to look at the condition of your bones and joints.
Causes of polymyalgia rheumatica
The cause of polymyalgia rheumatica is unknown. But, genetic and environmental factors can influence it.
Polymyalgia rheumatica is also age-related. Most people who are diagnosed with the condition are over 70. It’s very rare in people younger than 50.
Polymyalgia rheumatic is more common in women than men.
Treatment for polymyalgia rheumatica
The main treatment for polymyalgia rheumatica is a
corticosteroid
medication called prednisolone. This comes as a pill that’s prescribed by your GP.
Prednisolone blocks certain chemicals that cause inflammation in the body.
You’ll be prescribed a higher dose of prednisolone at first. This will be slowly reduced over time. This is likely to be over a year.
Other medications
Sometimes you may be prescribed other medicines with corticosteroids. This can help to prevent relapses or it may allow your dose of prednisolone to be reduced. Additional medicines are usually added by rheumatology doctors. They include a weekly dose of methotrexate or a daily dose of leflunomide.
Painkillers may also be recommended. These can be helpful if you also have arthritis or chronic pain.
There are
side effects linked to taking steroids
long-term. This means your healthcare professional may also prescribe medication to protect your bones. For example, calcium and vitamin D supplements and bisphosphonates. You may also be prescribed proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) to protect your stomach.
Living with polymyalgia rheumatica
If you have been diagnosed with polymyalgia rheumatica, you will need to have regular appointments at your GP practice. They will check:
how well you’re responding to treatment
whether your dose of prednisolone needs to be adjusted
how well you’re coping with the side effects of the medication
You will also have blood tests at these appointments.
You will usually have a follow-up appointment within a week of starting your steroid treatment. This is to check how you are responding to them. You’ll then have checks regularly to make sure the inflammation levels in your blood are normal while the steroids are being gradually reduced.
You should speak to your GP practice if your symptoms return during any part of your treatment. This is because the dosage of your medication may need to be adjusted. Your GP may refer you to a rheumatologist.
Further information and support
You can find other sources of information and support with polymyalgia rheumatica at:
PMR-GCA Scotland
Arthritis UK
Royal Osteoporosis Society
Source:
Scottish Society for Rheumatology