Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/children-and-young-peoples-muscles-bones-and-joints/positional-talipes-in-children-and-young-people/

---

Positional talipes in children and young people
Positional talipes is a common presentation in newborn babies, where their foot turns inwards and downwards. This may affect one or both feet. The foot remains flexible and can be moved gently through a full range of normal movement.
It can be normal for a newborn baby’s feet to turn inwards and downwards when at rest and for their legs to be slightly bowed, which can add to the appearance of the feet turning inwards.
These changes are common and, over time, the position of the feet will correct.
How is positional talipes caused?
It’s not always clear why positional talipes happens but there appears to be a link between babies with a large birth-weight or being over their term. This is because they have less room to move around in the womb in the last few weeks of pregnancy.
How is positional talipes managed?
Positional talipes is correctable. It usually resolves by itself within the first few months. Once the baby is born, they will have more space to move and stretch their feet.
You can give your baby some time out of their clothing to allow them to kick and move their legs freely. Make sure baby’s clothes are not too tight around their feet so they have room to move.
Can exercises help?
Gentle exercises for the foot may help. These should be performed regularly through the day. These exercises will be most effective when your baby is relaxed, such as during bath time.
gently move your baby’s foot outwards, hold each stretch for 10-30 seconds
gently move your baby’s foot upwards towards the shin, hold each stretch for 10-30 seconds
gently stroke or tickle the outside of your baby’s foot to encourage them to move it up and outwards
When should you speak to a healthcare professional?
Please speak to your healthcare professional if:
your baby’s foot feels stiff or you are unable to move it
your baby’s foot seems painful to move
your baby’s foot position has not improved or resolved within 6-8 weeks
Source:
NHS 24 CYP MSK Expert Panel