Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/injuries/head-and-neck-injuries/post-concussion-syndrome-pcs/

---

Post-concussion syndrome
Post-concussion syndrome (PCS) describes a set of symptoms that sometimes happen after a
concussion
. They can last for several weeks or months.
The exact cause of PCS is not known. One theory is that PCS is the result of a chemical imbalance in the brain. This imbalance is triggered by the injury that caused the initial concussion. Another theory suggests PCS may be caused by damage to nerve cells in the brain.
Symptoms of post-concussion syndrome
The symptoms of PCS can be physical, psychological or cognitive (affecting your ability to think). You may have more than one type of symptom at a time, but are unlikely to have them all.
Physical symptoms
persistent
headaches
that can be mild or severe, but last a long time
dizziness
nausea (feeling sick)
sensitivity to bright lights
sensitivity to loud noises
tinnitus
(ringing in the ears)
double or blurred vision
fatigue (tiredness)
changed or reduced sense of smell and taste
Psychological symptoms
depression
anxiety
irritability
lack of energy
loss of interest in activities you normally enjoy
problems sleeping
changes in appetite
sudden outbursts of emotion, like crying for no clear reason
Cognitive symptoms
decreased concentration
forgetfulness
difficulty remembering things or learning new information
difficulties with reasoning (working out problems)
Your symptoms may make it difficult to work and look after yourself.
Diagnosing post-concussion syndrome
PCS does not show on any scans or blood tests. This means that your healthcare professional will diagnose PCS using:
your medical history (that you’ve experienced a recent head injury)
the types symptoms you’re experiencing
when your symptoms began (before or after a head injury)
Managing post-concussion syndrome
There’s no specific treatment that cures PCS. But there are a lot of strategies that can help. For most patients the symptoms gradually improve over time.
Pacing strategies are often used to help manage PCS. These are strategies that allow you to gradually increase your activities. They can help you return to work and leisure activities.
Some activities can make PCS symptoms worse. You should avoid overstimulating activities that make your symptoms worse. These might include:
late nights
alcohol
crowded rooms
conversations with multiple people at once
vigorous exercises
prolonged screen time
You may be prescribed
antidepressants
or anti-migraine medication. This doesn’t mean your healthcare professional thinks you’re
depressed
or experiencing
migraines
. These medicines work by reducing abnormal nerve activity in the brain. This means they can help with the physical symptoms of PCS.
If you’re experiencing psychological symptoms,
antidepressants
can also help with this. Your healthcare professional may also suggest talking treatments (like
psychological therapy
).
Last updated:
15 January 2025
How can we improve this page?
Help us improve NHS inform
Thank You
Your feedback has been received
Don’t include personal information e.g. name, location or any personal health conditions.
Email Address
e.g. you@example.com
Message
Maximum of 500 characters
Send feedback
Add this page to
            Info For Me
Also on NHS inform
Concussion
Minor head injury
Severe head injury
Other health sites
Neurosymptoms: post-concussion syndrome
Sport Scotland: sports concussion guidance
Headway: post-concussion syndrome
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852