Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/postnatal-depression/

---

Postnatal depression
Postnatal depression is a type of depression that many parents experience after having a baby.
It affects more than 1 in 10 mothers within a year of giving birth. It can also affect fathers and partners, although this is less common.
With the right support, which can include self-help strategies and therapy, most people make a full recovery.
Symptoms of postnatal depression
Postnatal depression affects everyone differently. It can start at any point in the first year after giving birth. It may develop suddenly or gradually. It can also continue from depression during pregnancy.
Many people feel a bit down, tearful or anxious in the first week after giving birth. This is often called the baby blues and doesn’t last for more than 2 weeks after giving birth.
If your symptoms last longer or start later, you could have postnatal depression.
The main symptoms of postnatal depression include:
a persistent feeling of sadness and low mood
loss of interest in the world around you
no longer enjoying things that used to give you pleasure
lack of energy and feeling tired all the time
trouble sleeping at night
feeling that you’re unable to look after your baby
problems concentrating and making decisions
loss of appetite or comfort eating
feeling agitated or irritable
feelings of guilt, hopelessness and self-blame
difficulty bonding with your baby or not enjoying their company
frightening thoughts, for example, about hurting your baby – these can be scary, but they’re very rarely acted upon
thinking about suicide and self-harm
These symptoms can affect your day-to-day life and your relationships with your baby, family and friends.
Speak to your GP practice, health visitor or midwife as soon as possible if:
you think you may be depressed
Don’t struggle on alone and hope the problem will go away. It can take a lot longer to feel better if it’s not addressed.
Spotting the signs of postnatal depression
Postnatal depression can develop gradually and it can be hard to recognise. Some parents may avoid talking to family and friends about how they’re feeling. This may be because they worry they’ll be judged for not coping or not appearing happy.
Signs of postnatal depression in new parents include:
frequently crying for no obvious reason
having difficulty bonding with their baby
getting no pleasure from playing with their baby
feeling that they’re not a good parent
withdrawing from contact with other people
speaking negatively all the time
feeling hopeless
neglecting themselves, like not washing or changing their clothes
losing all sense of time, like being unaware whether 10 minutes or 2 hours have passed
losing their sense of humour
constantly worrying that something is wrong with their baby, regardless of reassurance from others
If you think someone you know is depressed, encourage them to talk about their feelings. This could be to you, a friend, their GP, their health visitor or their midwife.
What causes postnatal depression
The cause of postnatal depression isn’t completely clear. It has been linked to:
a history of mental health problems, particularly depression earlier in life or during pregnancy
having no close family or friends to support you
a poor relationship with your partner
recent stressful life events, like a bereavement
experiencing the ‘baby blues’
Even if there’s no specific cause of your symptoms, having a baby is a life-changing event that can sometimes trigger depression.
It often takes time to adapt to becoming a new parent. Looking after a baby can be stressful and exhausting.
Treatments for postnatal depression
Postnatal depression can be lonely, distressing and frightening. But, support and treatments are available. With the right treatment and support, most people make a full recovery, although it can take time.
Talk to your GP practice about different treatment options so you can decide together what’s best for you.
Your GP might also check your physical health to see if there are any problems that may need to be addressed. For example, you may be anaemic after giving birth. This could add to any feelings of depression you might have.
Psychological therapies for postnatal depression
Psychological therapies are usually the first treatment recommended for postnatal depression.
Guided self-help
Guided self-help involves working through a book or an online course. You can do this on your own or with some help from a therapist.
It focusses on the issues you might be facing, with practical advice on how to deal with them.
The courses usually last 9 to 12 weeks.
Cognitive behavioural therapy
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of talking therapy. It’s based on the idea that unhelpful and unrealistic thinking leads to negative behaviour.
CBT aims to break this cycle and find new ways of thinking that can help you behave in a more positive way.
CBT can be 1-to-1 with a therapist or in a group. Treatment will often last 3 to 4 months.
Interpersonal therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) involves talking to a therapist about the problems you’re experiencing.
It aims to identify problems in your relationships with family, friends or partners. It then looks at how they might relate to your feelings of depression.
Treatment usually lasts 3 to 4 months.
Antidepressants
Antidepressants
may be recommended if:
you have moderate or severe depression
you don’t want to try psychological treatment
psychological treatment doesn’t help
you have mild postnatal depression and a previous history of depression
If you’re breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about which medicines are suitable for you. Many types of antidepressants are safe to take while breastfeeding.
Your doctor should explain the risks and benefits of taking antidepressants. You should be offered the type with the least risk for you and your baby.
Self-help
There are many things you can try yourself to improve your symptoms and help you cope.
Start the depression self-help guide
You could also try to:
ask your loved ones if they can help look after the baby and do tasks like housework, cooking and shopping
make time for yourself – try to do activities that you find relaxing and enjoyable
rest when you can – although it can be difficult when you’re looking after a baby, try to sleep whenever you get the chance
follow
good sleeping habits
if you have one, ask your partner to help with the night-time work
exercise regularly – this has been shown to help boost mood in people with mild depression
eat regular,
healthy meals
Try to avoid
going for long periods without eating
drinking alcohol or taking drugs, as this can make you feel worse
Support groups
Ask your health visitor about support services in your area. They may be able to put you in touch with a social worker, counsellor or local support group. It can be reassuring to meet other people who are going through something similar.
Find postnatal depression support and information in your area
Treatments for severe postnatal depression
You might be referred to a
specialist perinatal mental health team
if:
your depression is is more severe
treatments like antidepressants, self-help or therapy don’t help
Your healthcare team will discuss if there are other treatments that are suitable for you.
Sometimes, for a small number of people, coming into hospital can help speed up recovery.
If your doctor or nurse suggests this, then you can be offered a place in a
Mother and Baby Unit
. This means you can continue to look after your baby while you get the best treatment for your illness.
Source:
NHS 24