Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/post-traumatic-stress-disorder-ptsd/

---

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental health problem caused by traumatic events.
PTSD can cause symptoms like problems sleeping, flashbacks and difficulty concentrating. This can have a big impact on your day-to-day life.
What causes PTSD?
There are many different traumatic events that can lead to PTSD. Some examples include:
a serious road accident
rape or sexual assault
a mugging or robbery
abuse, harassment or bullying, including racism, sexism or abuse targeting your identity
kidnap or being held hostage
an event where you fear for your life
witnessing violence, including in military combat, a terrorist attack or violent assault
seeing other people injured or killed
natural disasters, like severe floods or earthquakes
being diagnosed with a life-threatening condition
an unexpected injury or death of someone you’re close to
doing a job where you see or hear traumatic things, for example in the armed forces or emergency services
traumatic childbirth
The Royal College of Psychiatrists have advice on
coping after a traumatic event
.
Symptoms of PTSD
Everyone has a different experience of PTSD. You may have symptoms soon after the traumatic event or it may be a while before you have any.
Some people with PTSD have symptoms all the time. Others, will have periods where their symptoms come and go.
Reliving some of the things that happened
People with PTSD often relive the traumatic event through:
nightmares
flashbacks (feeling like the event is happening now)
intrusive thoughts or images
physical sensations like pain, sweating, feeling sick or trembling
Alertness or feeling on edge
People with PTSD can feel alert or on edge which means you may:
panic when reminded of the trauma
get angry or upset easily
have sleeping problems (
insomnia
)
feel jumpy or easily startled
feel irritable
have difficulty concentrating
be very alert (hypervigilance)
have symptoms of
anxiety
Avoiding feelings or memories
People with PTSD often try to avoid being reminded of the traumatic event. This means you may:
avoid people and places that remind you of the trauma
avoid talking about your experience
try to distract yourself with other things like work or hobbies
be unable to remember details of what happened
feel numb or cut off from your feelings
feel detached from your body
be unable to show affection
do self-destructive or reckless things
use alcohol or drugs
Difficult beliefs or feelings
PTSD can cause difficult beliefs or feelings. You may feel like:
you can’t trust anyone
nowhere is safe
nobody understands
you’re to blame for what happened
You may also have overwhelming feelings of anger, sadness, guilt or shame.
PTSD in children
PTSD can affect children as well as adults.
Children with PTSD can have similar symptoms to adults. They may also:
wet the bed
be very anxious about being separated from a parent or another adult
re-enact the traumatic event through play
Further information on PTSD in children
When to seek help for PTSD
It’s normal to experience upsetting and confusing thoughts after a traumatic event. In most cases, this will improve after a few weeks.
Speak to your GP practice if:
You or your child:
are still having problems about 4 weeks after the traumatic experience, or
the symptoms are particularly troublesome
If necessary, your GP can refer you to mental health specialists for further assessment and treatment.
Treatment for PTSD
PTSD can be treated even if it develops many years after a traumatic event.
There are different treatments for PTSD. The best option for you will depend on how severe your symptoms are and when they developed.
Watchful waiting
Your GP may recommend ‘watchful waiting’ if:
you have had symptoms of PTSD for less than 4 weeks, or
your symptoms are mild
Watchful waiting means your GP will monitor your symptoms to see if they improve or get worse. You should have a follow-up appointment within one month.
PTSD and complex PTSD (CPTSD) self-help guide
The PTSD and CPTSD self-help guide is for people with mild-to-moderate symptoms. It aims to help you:
consider whether you’re experiencing symptoms of PTSD or CPTSD
understand more about PTSD and CPTSD
think about ways to manage or recover from PTSD or CPTSD
Start the PTSD and CPTSD self-help guide
Trauma-focused cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
Trauma-focused CBT uses a range of techniques to help you come to terms with the traumatic event. For example, your therapist may ask you to address your traumatic memories by thinking about them in detail.
During this process, the therapist will help you cope with any distress you feel. They’ll also identify any unhelpful thoughts or misrepresentations you have about the experience. For example, feeling you’re to blame for what happened or feeling scared that it’ll happen again.
You’ll usually have 8 to 12 weekly sessions of trauma-focused CBT, although fewer may be needed. Sessions usually last for around 60 to 90 minutes. You’ll see the same therapist each week.
Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR)
Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR) is quite a new treatment for PTSD. It involves making rhythmic eye movements whilst describing the traumatic event to a therapist.
The rapid eye moments aim to mirror the way your brain processes information when you’re asleep.
Further information about EMDR
Medication
Medication isn’t regularly used to treat PTSD. It may be recommended if you:
are unable to, or don’t want to try, talking therapies like CBT
also have
depression
have sleep problems caused by PTSD
If you’re offered medication to treat PTSD, it’ll usually be an
antidepressant
.
Group therapy
It can be helpful to talk about your experience of PTSD with other people who have it. You can do this through group therapy.
Group therapy can help you understand PTSD. It also teaches you different ways to manage your symptoms.
Treatment for PTSD in children and young people
It’s usually recommended that children and young people with PTSD have trauma-focused CBT. This will usually be in 8 to 12 sessions. These are adapted to suit the child’s age, circumstances and development. If it’s appropriate, the treatment will involve the child’s family.
Medication isn’t usually recommended for children and young people with PTSD.
Further support with PTSD
There are many organisations that provide counselling and support for PTSD. This includes:
Combat Stress
– a military charity specialising in helping ex-servicemen and women
Rape Crisis Scotland
– provide services for women and girls who have experienced abuse, domestic violence and sexual assault
Turn to SARCS
– information on where to find support if you’ve been raped or sexually assaulted
Victim Support Scotland
– provide support and information to victims or witnesses of crime
Cruse Bereavement Support
– provide support and information for people who have experienced bereavement
Source:
NHS 24