Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/psychosis/

---

Psychosis
Psychosis is a common and serious mental health problem.
Symptoms of psychosis
The main symptoms of psychosis are:
hallucinations – you might see, hear, feel, taste, or smell things that aren’t real, or you might hear voices
delusions – you might believe things that are untrue, often this can lead someone to believe that someone is trying to harm them
disordered thinking or speaking – you might speak more quickly or constantly, or switch from one topic to another mid-sentence
These symptoms often occur together in what is known as a psychotic episode.
People who have psychotic episodes are often unaware their behaviour is unusual. These symptoms are usually frightening or disturbing.
During a psychotic episode most people don’t realise they are ill. Their friends and family may not understand why they are reacting so strongly to things they can’t see or hear.
Getting help for someone else with psychosis
If you’re worried about someone, you could contact their GP practice for them.
If they’re already getting support from a mental health service, contact the service directly.
You can contact NHS 24’s mental health hub on 111 for advice.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
someone has symptoms of psychosis and they need urgent treatment
SAMH has
information and guidance for friends and family of someone diagnosed with psychosis
.
This includes information on how to look after yourself while supporting someone else.
What causes psychosis?
Psychosis is sometimes caused by a specific mental health condition like:
schizophrenia
– causes a range of psychological symptoms, including hallucinations and delusions
bipolar disorder
– affects mood and can cause periods of depression and mania
severe depression
Psychosis can also be triggered by:
a traumatic experience
stress
drug
misuse
alcohol
misuse
a physical condition, like a
brain tumour
or
dementia
a side effect of a prescribed medicine
head injury
childbirth
How often a psychotic episode occurs and how long it lasts can depend on the underlying cause.
Postnatal psychosis
Postnatal psychosis is a severe form of
postnatal depression
. This is a type of depression some women experience after having a baby.
It often happens during the first few weeks after having a baby.
Postnatal psychosis is more likely to affect women who already have a mental health condition. For example,
bipolar disorder
or
schizophrenia
.
Speak to your GP practice or phone 111 if:
You or someone else has symptoms of postnatal psychosis like:
talking and thinking too much or too quickly
lack of energy
loss of appetite
trouble sleeping
hallucinations
delusions
Phone 999 if someone is at immediate risk of danger or harm.
Diagnosing psychosis
Speak to your GP practice immediately if you experience psychotic episodes.
It’s important that psychosis is treated as soon as possible.
Your GP may ask you some questions to help work out what’s causing your psychosis.
They should refer you to a mental health specialist for further assessment and treatment.
Treatment for psychosis
Treatment for psychosis involves using a combination of:
anti-psychotic medication
psychological therapies – including talking therapies
social support
Some people may have to take anti-psychotic medication long-term to manage their symptoms.
Do not suddenly stop taking your medication as it may cause your symptoms to return.
If your psychotic episodes are severe, you may need to be admitted to a psychiatric hospital for treatment.
Your treatment is likely to be coordinated by a team of mental health professionals working together. If this is your first psychotic episode, you may be referred to an early intervention team.
Early intervention teams
An early intervention team is a team of healthcare professionals. They work with people who have experienced their first episode of psychosis.
Depending on your care needs, early intervention teams aim to provide:
a full assessment of your symptoms
prescriptions for medications
psychological services
social, occupational, and educational support
Complications of psychosis
Some people use drugs and alcohol as a way of managing the symptoms of psychosis. But, it can make symptoms worse or cause other problems
People with psychosis are at a higher risk of
self harm
or
suicide
.
Speak to your GP practice if you’re self-harming.
If you’re feeling suicidal, you can:
speak to someone you trust, like a friend or family member
phone 111 and choose the mental health option
make an urgent appointment at your GP practice
if you have one, contact your mental health team
Learn more about surviving suicidal thoughts
Source:
NHS 24