Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/psychotic-depression/

---

Psychotic depression
Some people who have severe depression will also experience symptoms of psychosis. Common symptoms of psychosis are hallucinations and delusional thinking.
People with psychotic depression will often be unable to accept that the thoughts they’re having are being caused by the condition. This can be frightening for the person as well as their loved ones.
Depression with psychosis is known as psychotic depression.
Symptoms of severe depression
Severe clinical depression can make you feel:
sad and hopeless for most of the day
like you have no interest in anything
that it’s impossible to get through the day
You may have these feelings nearly everyday.
Other symptoms include:
fatigue (exhaustion)
losing pleasure in things
inability to concentrate
difficulty making decisions
sleep problems
appetite changes
feeling guilty
feeling worthless
having thoughts about suicide, or death
Read more about depression
Symptoms of psychotic depression
Moments of psychosis are known as psychotic episodes. If you experience a psychotic episode you may have:
delusions – unshakeable beliefs or thoughts that are likely to be false
hallucinations – hearing, seeing, or sometimes smelling, feeling or tasting things that aren’t there
Hallucinations and delusions almost always reflect the pessimism and guilt of the person experiencing them. They may believe they have committed a crime or that they are to blame for something.
You might experience something called psychomotor agitation. This can make you feel like you can’t sit still or relax. It causes fidgeting.
The opposite symptom can also happen. Psychomotor retardation can cause the thoughts and the movement of their body to slow down.
If you have psychotic depression you might be at a higher risk of thinking about suicide.
Causes of psychotic depression
It’s not fully understood what causes psychotic depression yet. It’s known that depression doesn’t have one single cause. The condition has a lot of different triggers.
Stressful life events like divorce, financial worries, or bereavement can trigger depression.
Severe depression can run in families, which suggests genes might play a role in depression. However, the reason some people develop psychosis as part of severe depression is not known.
Many people who have psychotic depression have experienced a difficult time in childhood. This might have been a traumatic event.
Treatment for psychotic depression
Treatment for psychotic depression has 3 main parts:
medication – taking a combination of
antipsychotics
and
antidepressants
can help
psychological therapies – cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a talking therapy that can help treat psychosis
social support – support with social needs like employment, education and accommodation
You may need intensive home treatment, with several visits a day from a healthcare professional or have to spend some time in hospital.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT, or electric shock treatment) might be recommended if other treatments haven’t helped.
Although treatment for psychotic depression is usually effective, you’ll still need follow-up appointments. This is so your treatment team can continue to monitor your progress.
Getting help for someone with psychotic depression
Often friends, relatives, or carers have to seek help for a person with psychotic depression. This is because people with psychosis often don’t know they’re acting and thinking strangely.
If you’re worried someone might be experiencing psychosis you should contact their:
community mental health team or social worker if they have one
GP practice or take them to A&E
If you think the person’s symptoms are putting them at risk, you can:
take them to the nearest A&E, if they agree
phone their GP practice, or 111 if the GP practice is closed
in an emergency, phone 999 and ask for an ambulance
Advice and support for psychotic depression
Visit the
SANE website
or the
Mind website
for more information, support and advice about psychotic depression.
Read about psychosis
Source:
NHS 24