Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/rare-conditions/

---

Rare conditions
Rare conditions
There are around 7000 known rare conditions, with new conditions being discovered every year.
In Scotland, around 400,000 people are affected by a rare condition. This means that about 1 in 17 people will be affected by a rare condition at some point in their lives.
Some rare conditions are more common but many only affect a small number of people. Some extremely rare conditions may only affect a handful of people in the whole world.
A guide for patients and families affected by rare conditions
Watch this video for more advice and information on rare conditions.
What is a rare condition?
A rare condition is one that affects less than 1 in 2000 people.
Most rare conditions are chronic. This means they are a long-term condition that often has to be managed throughout a person’s life.
Most symptoms of a rare condition start in childhood. These can often be managed with treatment.
Over time, individuals will also learn about managing their own health and wellbeing. This means many people with a rare condition will be able to live active and fulfilling lives.
Diagnosing a rare condition
There are many different types of rare condition. Most are genetic but some are acquired (non-genetic conditions).
Rare conditions can be diagnosed before birth, during childhood or later in life.
It can be challenging to diagnose a rare condition. This means that many patients experience a long journey to get a diagnosis. Dealing with this uncertainty can be frustrating and unsettling.
Sometimes a condition is so rare that it may not be possible to diagnose.
If you think you may be affected by a rare condition, you should discuss this with your GP practice. They may refer you to specialist services and recommend genetic testing.
Testing for a rare condition
Healthcare professionals will request different tests depending on your symptoms. These may include
blood tests
,
x-rays
or
scans
. They may also consider genetic testing.
Genetic conditions
Most rare conditions are genetic (about 80%).
A genetic condition is sometimes passed through one or both parents to their child. Some genetic conditions also happen in a family for the first time and may not be inherited from a parent.
Genetic testing
There are lots of types of genetic testing but
a blood test
is usually used. Your genetic team will explain any tests that are relevant to your condition in more detail.
Some tests aim to find changes in genes or chromosomes (the packages for your genes).
Genetic testing is always advancing so new conditions are being diagnosed every year.
Genetic centres
If it’s thought that you could have a rare genetic condition, you may be referred to a genetic centre. They can provide specialist counselling about genetic testing.
In Scotland, there are 4 regional genetic centres. These have expertise in rare genetic conditions. These are based in:
Glasgow
Aberdeen
Dundee
Edinburgh
Living with a rare condition
Living with a rare condition can be overwhelming and frightening. But, you’re not alone and
support is available.
If you’re struggling to get a diagnosis, don’t give up. You should continue to reach out to your healthcare professionals. Remember,
it’s ok to ask
questions about your healthcare.
Healthy living
If you have a rare condition, it’s important to maintain a healthy and active lifestyle.
The symptoms of a rare condition can worsen if you also have a common condition like:
diabetes
obesity
high blood pressure
Your GP practice can offer advice about healthy living.
Further information on healthy living
Specialist services
In NHS Scotland, there are some networks and services for specific conditions. These provide information and support for healthcare professionals, patients and their families.
Further information about specialist services
Further information about specialist networks
Support and information
Support groups and charities can be a good source of help and information. If there’s not a specific support group for your condition, you might find a more general group helpful.
Genetic Alliance UK
Genetic Alliance UK
supports people with rare, undiagnosed and genetic conditions. They can direct you to relevant information and support for your rare condition.
Rare Resources Scotland
has information for people living with rare conditions in Scotland. It also supports their families and healthcare professionals.
SWAN UK
is run by Genetic Alliance UK. It’s a support network for families affected by a condition that doesn’t have a name. These conditions are genetic and are so rare they often remain undiagnosed.
Office for Rare Conditions
The Office for Rare Conditions provide information and support in Scotland. This is for everyone affected by rare and undiagnosed conditions.
More about the Office for Rare Conditions
Unique
Unique is an international group for anyone affected by:
a rare chromosome disorder
an autosomal dominant single gene disorder
They provide:
information leaflets for some rare conditions
practical guides for families on topics like sleep and education
signposting to local and social resources, including support groups and Facebook groups
More about Unique
Contact
Contact
work with families with disabled children. This work includes:
providing support to families in hospital
running workshops for parents on sleep, money matters and more
providing help to find support groups
More about Contact Scotland
Last updated:
21 October 2025
How can we improve this page?
Help us improve NHS inform
Thank You
Your feedback has been received
Don’t include personal information e.g. name, location or any personal health conditions.
Email Address
e.g. you@example.com
Message
Maximum of 500 characters
Send feedback
Add this page to
            Info For Me
Also on NHS inform
Cancer
Cystic fibrosis
Huntington's Disease
Other health sites
Genetic Alliance
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852