Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/conditions-that-can-affect-multiple-parts-of-the-body/reactive-arthritis/

---

Reactive arthritis
Reactive arthritis causes inflammation (redness and swelling) in different parts of the body.
It usually develops after an infection. In most cases it clears up in a few months without causing long-term problems.
Reactive arthritis can occur at any age, but it often affects young adults aged between 20 to 40. Men are generally affected more than women.
Causes of reactive arthritis
Reactive arthritis is usually linked to an infection. This includes:
sexually transmitted infections (STIs) – like
chlamydia
or
gonorrhoea
gastrointestinal infections – like
food poisoning
The body’s immune system seems to over-react to these infections. It then starts to attack healthy tissue, leading to inflammation.
People with a gene known as HLA-B27 are also more likely to develop reactive arthritis. But, it’s not clear why this is the case.
Symptoms of reactive arthritis
Reactive arthritis most often affects the:
joints and tendons – causing pain, stiffness and swelling, often in the knees, feet, toes, hips and ankles
eyes – causing eye pain, redness, sticky discharge,
conjunctivitis
and sometimes inflammation
urinary system – causing pain when peeing, or discharge from the penis or vagina
Most people will not experience symptoms in all of these areas.
Other symptoms
Reactive arthritis can also cause symptoms, including:
feeling unusually tired
a high temperature (fever)
weight loss
mouth ulcers
painless white patches inside your mouth
a rash
thick and crumbly nails
abdominal (tummy) pain
diarrhoea
Speak to an optician or go to A&E if you have:
pain in one of your eyes and your vision becomes misty
Speak to your GP practice if you have:
painful and swollen joints, especially after symptoms of an infection like diarrhoea or pain when urinating
Diagnosing reactive arthritis
There’s no single test for reactive arthritis. But, different tests may be used to check for infection and rule out other reasons for your symptoms. This includes:
blood tests
urine tests
genital swabs
X-rays
samples of fluid from a joint or joints
stool sample
Your GP will also want to know about your recent medical history. For example, whether you may have recently had a bowel infection or an STI.
Treating reactive arthritis
There is no cure for reactive arthritis but the condition is usually temporary.
Symptoms can often be controlled using:
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
painkillers like
ibuprofen
Severe symptoms may need to be manged with disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs).
Antibiotics
don’t treat reactive arthritis itself. But, you may be prescribed antibiotics to treat an infection like an STI.
Things you can do
Do
get plenty of rest
avoid using the affected joints
apply ice to swelling (don’t place ice directly on the skin)
Once your symptoms improve, it’s also helpful to begin some gentle exercise. Focus on strengthening the muscles and improving the range of motion in joints.
Speak to a healthcare professional about exercises for you. You may be referred to a physiotherapist.
Preventing reactive arthritis
STIs are a common cause of reactive arthritis. To help prevent this, you should always use a barrier method of contraception during sex. For example,
a condom
.
Further information on contraception
Source:
Scottish Society for Rheumatology