Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/pregnancy-and-childbirth/losing-a-baby/recurrent-miscarriage/

---

Recurrent miscarriage
Recurrent miscarriage is when you’ve experienced 3 or more early miscarriages.
Read more about early miscarriages
3 or more early miscarriages refers to the total number of early miscarriages you’ve had. It does not matter if you’ve had a successful pregnancy in-between miscarriages. The miscarriages do not need to happen one after the other.
Causes of recurrent miscarriage
Most of the time there’s no clear reason why a miscarriage happens. It’s unlikely to be caused by anything you did or did not do.
Read more about the causes of a miscarriage
Tests and investigations
If you’ve had 3 or more miscarriages, you may be offered tests or investigations. These can help medical professionals understand why you’re experiencing recurrent miscarriage.
The tests you may be offered can include:
2 blood tests for antiphospholipid syndrome
a blood test to check your thyroid function
a test for
diabetes
tests for PCOS and prolactin imbalance
a scan of your uterus to check its shape
You and your partner may also be offered genetic tests. These can check for inherited chromosomal conditions.
You may not be offered all of these tests. Medical professionals will advise which are clinically appropriate for your circumstances.
It’s not always possible to work out exactly what is going wrong. The most likely outcome is that medical professionals will not be able to find a specific reason for your losses.
It can be difficult to be told that your recurrent miscarriages are unexplained. You may feel hopeless, especially if there’s nothing you can treat or change next time.
Most people who have had 3 unexplained miscarriages do go on to have a healthy pregnancy.
Your feelings and emotions
Recurrent miscarriage can feel very hard to bear. You and your partner may be struggling with difficult feelings.
As well as grief and sadness, you may also experience:
frustration, especially if you cannot find out why you’re having recurrent miscarriages
guilt, even though it’s unlikely that something you did caused your miscarriages
isolation, if you feel alone
jealousy, particularly if you’re in contact with other people who are pregnant or have babies
While it’s important not to isolate yourself, sometimes it helps to reduce contact with people who are triggering these feelings. If you have a strong relationship, you may even be able to explain to them how you feel. If they’re people you see on social media, it may help to avoid social media for a while.
Your experience of recurrent miscarriage is unique to you, your partner and family. There’s no right or wrong way to feel.
Read more about support after a miscarriage
Depression
Some people develop clinical depression after losing a pregnancy. If you’re having recurrent miscarriages, you’ll experience a lot of grief. This can make it difficult to recognise depression.
People who are grieving normally find their feelings of sadness and loss come and go. They’re still able to enjoy things and look forward to the future.
People who are clinically depressed constantly feel sad. They find it difficult to enjoy anything or be positive about the future.
Read more about depression
Contact your GP if you or your partner are:
struggling to cope after losing a pregnancy
showing signs of
post-traumatic stress disorder
showing signs of
perinatal obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
They’ll be able to help you get appropriate treatment and support.
Read more about
identifying, treating and managing mental health disorders
.
Source:
                                        Scottish Government