Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/respiratory-syncytial-virus-rsv/

---

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a virus that can affect the lungs and airways. In most people, RSV causes mild cold-like symptoms.
Occasionally, RSV can cause severe lung infections. These can include:
bronchiolitis (an infection of the small airways in the lungs)
pneumonia
RSV infections peak during late autumn and winter, but can happen all year round.
Read more about the RSV vaccine for older adults
Read more about the RSV vaccine during pregnancy
Symptoms of RSV
RSV infection often looks like a cold. You may experience:
a runny nose
a decreased appetite
tiredness
a
cough
shortness of breath
wheezing
fever
croup
a middle ear infection
(otitis media)
You can treat a mild cases of RSV at home, without contacting a healthcare professional.
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
you have severe
chest pain
in the middle of your chest that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
Your child:
has lips or skin that are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of their hands
has severe difficulty breathing – they may make grunting noises or suck their stomach in under their ribcage
is breathing fast or stops or pauses
is pulling in at their throat area (tracheal tug) or their windpipe is more prominent
is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do – they may find it difficult to focus on you or are more difficult to wake up than usual
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 38°C (101°F) or above and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 36°C (97°F) or less and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
Phone your GP immediately if you:
are more short of breath than usual
have pain when breathing in or coughing
are feeling confused, dizzy, or lightheaded
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
are coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
have
heart palpitations
– this may feel like your heart is racing, going too slowly or skipping a beat or like a fluttering feeling in your chest
are peeing less than usual – this can be a sign of
dehydration
have a very high or low temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or you’re shivering
Your child:
is more short of breath than usual
has pain when breathing in or coughing
is feeling confused, dizzy or lightheaded
feels sick or is being sick – for example, they can’t keep food or fluids down
is coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
has had a dry nappy for 12 hours or more, or is showing other signs of
dehydration
has a very high or low temperature – for example, they feel either hot or cold to touch or are shivering
If your GP is closed, phone 111.
Treatment for RSV
There’s no specific treatment for RSV.
A mild case of RSV will normally get better on it’s own, and can be treated at home. You can ease symptoms in the same way you would for a cold. This could include:
drinking plenty of fluids
taking over-the-counter pain relief like paracetamol or ibuprofen
Read more about treating a common cold
What causes RSV
RSV is spread by droplets from coughs and sneezes. It can live on surfaces or objects for several hours.
Someone with RSV will normally be contagious for 1 to 2 days before RSV symptoms start. Most people are contagious for 3 to 8 days. Some infants and people with weakened immune systems may be contagious for up to 4 weeks.
Who is most at risk of RSV
RSV infection can happen to anyone, but for most it will be a mild infection that is like a cold.
Some groups are more at risk of severe infection. They are:
babies who were born prematurely
children under 2 years of age
people with chronic lung disease or congenital heart disease
people with weakened immune systems
adults over 65 years of age
How to prevent RSV
There are things you can do to help prevent RSV infection.
Do
wash your hands often, especially before touching your mouth or handling food
sneeze and cough into tissues
throw used tissues away immediately and then wash your hands
clean surfaces regularly
use your own cup, plates, cutlery and kitchen utensils
Don’t
do not share towels with someone who has cold-like symptoms
do not let your child share toys with someone who has cold-like symptoms
RSV vaccination
The RSV vaccination programme helps protect babies and older adults from the RSV virus.
The vaccine will be offered:
to older adults aged 75 to 79
during pregnancy (from 28 weeks onwards)
Read more about the RSV vaccine for older adults
Read more about the RSV vaccine during pregnancy
Last updated:
20 October 2025
How can we improve this page?
Help us improve NHS inform
Thank You
Your feedback has been received
Don’t include personal information e.g. name, location or any personal health conditions.
Email Address
e.g. you@example.com
Message
Maximum of 500 characters
Send feedback
Add this page to
            Info For Me
Also on NHS inform
RSV vaccine for older adults
RSV vaccine during pregnancy
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852