Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/restless-legs-syndrome/

---

Restless legs syndrome
Restless legs syndrome (RLS), also known as Willis-Ekbom disease, is a common condition of the nervous system. It causes an overwhelming, irresistible urge to move the legs.
As many as 1 in 10 people are affected by restless legs syndrome at some point in their life.
Women are twice as likely to develop restless legs syndrome than men. It’s also more common in middle age, although the symptoms can develop at any age, including childhood.
Symptoms of restless legs syndrome
Restless legs syndrome usually causes an overwhelming urge to move your legs. It also causes an uncomfortable sensation in your legs, which can affect your arms, chest and face.
This sensation has been described as:
tingling, burning, itching or throbbing
a “creepy-crawly” feeling
feeling like fizzy water is inside the blood vessels in the legs
a painful, cramping sensation in the legs, particularly in the calves
These unpleasant sensations can range from mild to severe. They’re usually worse in the evening and during the night. The sensation can often be relieved by moving or rubbing your legs.
Some people experience symptoms occasionally, while others have them every day. You may find it difficult to sit for long periods of time, like on a long train journey.
Periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS)
Up to 80% of people with restless legs syndrome also have periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS).
If you have PLMS, your leg will jerk or twitch uncontrollably, usually at night while you’re asleep. The movements are brief and repetitive, and usually happen every 10 to 60 seconds.
PLMS can be severe enough to wake up both you and your partner. The involuntary leg movements can also occur when you’re awake and resting.
Types of restless legs syndrome
There are 2 types of restless legs syndrome:
primary or idiopathic restless legs syndrome
secondary restless legs syndrome
Primary restless legs syndrome
Primary restless legs syndrome is the more common type of restless legs syndrome. In these cases, there’s no obvious cause of the syndrome.
It may be caused by a problem with a part of the brain called the basal ganglia. This part of the brain uses a neurotransmitter called dopamine (a chemical) to help control muscle activity and movement. If the cells in your basal ganglia get damaged, the amount of dopamine in the brain is reduced. This causes muscle spasms and involuntary movements.
Dopamine levels naturally fall towards the end of the day. This may explain why your symptoms are often worse in the evening and during the night.
Specific genes may also be related to restless legs syndrome. This means it can run in families. In these cases, symptoms usually start before the age of 40.
Secondary restless legs syndrome
Secondary restless legs syndrome occurs as a complication of another health condition.
You can develop secondary restless legs syndrome if you have:
iron deficiency anaemia
chronic kidney disease
diabetes
Parkinson’s disease
rheumatoid arthritis
an
underactive thyroid gland
fibromyalgia
Some women develop secondary restless legs syndrome during pregnancy. It’s most common from 27 weeks onwards. It usually stops within 4 weeks of giving birth.
Diagnosing restless legs syndrome
There’s no single test for diagnosing restless legs syndrome.
A diagnosis will be based on your:
symptoms
medical history
family history
physical examination
test results
Your GP should be able to diagnose restless legs syndrome.
You’ll be asked about the pattern of your symptoms to help assess their severity. You may also be referred for
blood tests
. These will confirm if you have primary or secondary restless legs syndrome.
If your restless legs syndrome is disrupting your sleep, you may be sent for sleep tests. These allow healthcare professionals to see exactly what happens when you’re asleep.
Treating restless legs syndrome
The treatment for restless legs syndrome can depend on:
what type of restless legs syndrome you have
the severity of your symptoms
There are triggers that don’t cause restless legs syndrome, but can make symptoms worse. These include medications like:
some
antidepressants
antipsychotics
lithium
calcium channel blockers
some antihistamines
metoclopramide
Do not stop taking any medicine that you have been prescribed without checking with your GP or healthcare provider first. Suddenly stopping medication can make you unwell.
Other possible triggers of restless legs syndrome include:
smoking
excessive caffeine or
alcohol
consumption
being overweight or
obese
stress
lack of
exercise
Treatment for primary restless legs syndrome
If your symptoms are mild, you may find that making a few lifestyle changes improves the syndrome.
Having good sleep hygiene can help restless legs syndrome. This means that you have healthy sleep habits.
Do
exercise regularly
follow a regular bedtime routine
take time to relax before bed
stick to the same bed time every day
get up at the same time every morning
have a warm bath in the evening
Don’t
do not smoke
do not nap during the day
do not drink or use stimulants like alcohol, caffeine and drugs before bed
do not exercise before bed
During an episode of restless legs syndrome, the following measures may help relieve your symptoms:
massaging your legs
applying a hot or cold compress to your leg muscles
doing activities that distract your mind, like reading or watching television
relaxation exercises, like
yoga or tai chi
walking
and
stretching
Medication
If primary restless legs syndrome is causing more severe symptoms, there are medications that may help. Your GP may suggest trying dopamine agonists, painkillers, hypnotics or levodopa.
Treatment for secondary restless legs syndrome
If your symptoms are caused by an underlying health problem, medical professionals will treat that health problem first. It may be that treating that problem will resolve the syndrome.
Restless legs syndrome is not life threatening. Severe cases can disrupt sleep, causing
insomnia
, and trigger
anxiety
and
depression
.
Source:
                                        Scottish Government