Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/conditions-that-can-affect-multiple-parts-of-the-body/rheumatoid-arthritis/

---

Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis is a long-term condition. It can cause:
pain
swelling
stiffness in the joints
It can also cause deformity of the joints.
It normally affects the hands, wrists and feet. But, other joints and parts of the body are sometimes also affected.
Causes of rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune condition. This means it’s caused by the body’s immune system attacking itself.
The immune system helps to defend our body from infections. But, in rheumatoid arthritis the immune system sends antibodies to the lining of the joints by mistake. The antibodies then attack the tissues surrounding the joint. This causes the thin layer of cells (synovium) covering the joints to become sore and inflamed.
Inflammation also causes chemicals to be released. These chemicals thicken the synovium and damage the:
bones
cartilage – the stretchy connective tissue between bones
tendons – the tissue that connects bone to muscle
ligaments – the tissue that connects bone and cartilage
The chemicals can also change the shape of the joint over time.
What is rheumatoid arthritis?
This video requires Marketing cookies.
Update your consent
.
Symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis
The symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis vary from person to person. They can come and go, and may change over time.
Symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis that affect the joints include:
pain
swelling
stiffness and difficulty moving affected joints
redness
heat around the joints
In some people, firm swellings called rheumatoid nodules also develop under the skin around affected joints.
Some people with rheumatoid arthritis can experience other symptoms. This includes:
tiredness and lack of energy
a high temperature (fever)
sweating
a poor appetite
weight loss
Diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis can be difficult to diagnose. This is because many conditions cause joint stiffness and inflammation.
You should speak to your GP if you think you have symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. They will ask about your symptoms and carry out a physical examination to:
check your joints for any swelling
look at how easily your joints move
You GP may also arrange
blood tests
.
If your GP thinks that you have rheumatoid arthritis, they will refer you to a specialist (Rheumatologist). The Rheumatologist will arrange to meet you to go over your history and examine your joints. They may need to arrange extra tests, like more blood tests or scans, before they can make a diagnosis and decide if treatment is needed. These will:
check for joint inflammation and damage
show what kind of
arthritis
you have
Treating rheumatoid arthritis
There’s no cure for rheumatoid arthritis but with treatment the joint pain, swelling and stiffness will improve and the risk of joint damage can be reduced.
Medication
Different types of medications can be used to treat rheumatoid arthritis to relieve joint pain, stiffness and swelling. This will also reduce the chance of developing joint damage.
The two main types of medication are:
disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
biologic treatments
They usually need to be taken for a long-time. They are most effective when started early after the first symptoms.
You may also need other medication to relieve the joint pain and stiffness.. For example:
painkillers
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
corticosteroids
Supportive treatments
You may be offered other treatments to help your rheumatoid arthritis symptoms. This includes:
physiotherapy – helps improve muscle strength, flexibility and fitness
occupational therapy
– provides training and advice if you need help with everyday tasks or are having difficulty at work
podiatry – helps if you have problems with your feet
Surgery
If you have rheumatoid arthritis, surgery is sometimes needed to:
improve movement in your joint
reduce pain
correct damage to the shape of the joint
Surgery for rheumatoid arthritis includes:
finger, hand and wrist surgery – there are different types to correct problems in this area
arthroscopy
– a procedure to remove inflamed joint tissue
joint replacement surgery
– surgery to replace part or all of a joint
Complementary and alternative therapies
Some people with rheumatoid arthritis try complementary therapies like:
massage
acupuncture
osteopathy
chiropractic
Living with rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis can be hard to deal with because the symptoms are unpredictable.
Some days the pain and stiffness will be worse than others and there’s no way of knowing when a flare-up will occur. This may mean that some people develop stress,
anxiety
or
depression
. It can also cause fear, frustration and anger.
You should speak to a healthcare professional if you’re struggling to deal with your condition.
The
National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society (NRAS) website
has information about living with rheumatoid arthritits.
You can also phone the National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society (NRAS) helpline on 0800 298 7650. It’s Monday to Friday, 9.30am to 4.30pm. The helpline offers information and emotional support for people with rheumatoid arthritis.
Starting a family
If you’re taking medication for rheumatoid arthritis, tell your healthcare team if you:
want to start a family
are worried about becoming pregnant while on medication
They will make sure your arthritis is controlled whilst you’re trying to get pregnant.
Raising a family
Babies and young children are physically and mentally demanding for any parent. But, rheumatoid arthritis can increase the challenges.
If you’re struggling to cope, you should speak to your health visitor.
Sex and relationships
Pain, discomfort and changes in the way you feel can affect your sex life. Your self-esteem or thoughts about how you look may also affect your confidence.
Talk to your partner or GP about how rheumatoid arthritis is affecting your sexuality and sexual relationships.
Money and benefits
If you have to stop work or work part time because of rheumatoid arthritis, you may find it hard to cope financially.
You may be entitled to financial support like:
Statutory Sick Pay
Employment and Support Allowance
Personal Independence Payment
Attendance Allowance
Carer’s Allowance
Adult Disability Payment
You may also be eligible for other benefits if you have children living at home or if you have a low household income.
Telecare Self-Check online tool
Visit the
Telecare Self-Check online tool
to find the right support for you in your area. This will help you find information on telecare services that could help you live independently at home for longer.
Complications of rheumatoid arthritis
Having rheumatoid arthritis can sometimes lead to other conditions. This includes:
carpal tunnel syndrome
– tingling and numbness in your hand and fingers
inflammation in other parts of the body for example in the lungs or around the heart
joint damage and deformity
If you have rheumatoid arthritis, you’re also at a higher risk of:
cardiovascular disease (CVD)
– which can cause heart attacks or strokes
cervical myelopathy
The risk of complications developing is lower if rheumatoid arthritis is controlled well.
Risk factors for rheumatoid arthritis
It’s not clear what triggers rheumatoid arthritis. But, there are some things that could increase the risk of developing it. This includes:
genetics – it may run in families
hormones – it’s more common in women which may be due to the effects of a hormone called oestrogen
smoking
Source:
Scottish Society for Rheumatology