Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/rosacea/

---

Rosacea
Rosacea is a common long-term skin condition that mainly affects the face. It can cause redness (blushing) on the cheeks, forehead, nose, chest and neck, as well as other symptoms.
Symptoms of rosacea
Rosacea causes many symptoms, although not everyone will experience them all.
Rosacea can cause redness (blushing) on the face, chin and chest. These areas may also feel hot, warm or painful.
The redness usually comes and goes and lasts a few minutes each time. If rosacea gets worse, the skin on your cheeks, nose and forehead may be red all the time.
Other symptoms of rosacea include:
a burning or stinging feeling when using skincare products
dry skin
swelling – especially around the eyes
yellow-orange patches on the skin
visible blood vessels
sore eyelids or crusts around your eyelashes
pink or red bumps on your face – these may be filled with pus
thickened skin – this is usually on the nose and occurs after several years
There may be times when your rosacea symptoms get better or worse.
The following images were sourced from
dermentnz.org.
Rosacea can cause redness (blushing) on the cheeks, forehead, nose, chest and neck.
Rosacea may lead to pink or red lumps on the cheeks.
Rosacea can sometimes cause the blood vessels in the face to be seen.
Speak to your GP practice urgently or phone 111 if:
You have rosacea and:
your eye is painful
your vision is blurred
you’re sensitive to light
you have a red eye
your eye feels gritty
These could be signs of keratitis, which can be serious if not treated urgently.
Speak to your GP practice if:
you have symptoms of rosacea
Diagnosing rosacea
There’s no specific test for rosacea.
To help diagnose rosacea, your GP will:
look at your skin
ask about your symptoms
ask if there’s anything that triggers your symptoms
Your GP may arrange other tests to find out if there’s any other reason for your symptoms.
Treatment for rosacea
There’s currently no cure for rosacea, but treatment can help control the symptoms. It may get worse if it isn’t treated.
To help treat rosacea, your GP may suggest:
prescription creams and gels that you put on the skin
taking antibiotics
A GP may refer you to a skin specialist, known as a dermatologist, if treatments don’t work.
Rosacea triggers
The exact cause of rosacea is unknown, but some things can make symptoms worse. This includes:
alcohol
spicy foods
hot drinks
sunlight
hot or cold weather
stress
aerobic exercise like running
What can help rosacea
There are some things that may help rosacea symptoms.
Do
wear a sunscreen of at least SPF 30 every day
try to avoid heat, sunlight or humid conditions if possible
cover your face and nose with a scarf to help protect your skin from cold weather and wind
use gentle skincare products for sensitive skin
clean your eyelids at least once a day if you have blepharitis, which causes swollen, itchy eyes
take steps to manage stress
It may also be helpful to avoid things that you know trigger your symptoms, like alcohol, hot drinks or spicy food.
Living with rosacea
If you have rosacea, you may become aware of others looking at you. Some people may make comments about your appearance or ask questions. These things can have an impact on your self-confidence and mental health.
Get support with your mental wellbeing
Support with rosacea
The charity
Changing Faces
can offer advice and guidance for adults and young people living with a visible difference. They also support parents of children who look different.
You can follow their
self-help advice
or phone their
support information helpline
. This is available on 300 012 0275, 10am to 4pm.
Skin camouflage
It may be possible to disguise patches of persistent red skin using special creams or powders. This is called skin camouflage.
Changing Faces
offers a skin camouflage service.
Find out more about skin camouflage
Source:
NHS 24