Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/seasonal-affective-disorder-sad/

---

Seasonal affective disorder (SAD)
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a type of
depression
that has a seasonal pattern. The symptoms often begin in the autumn as the days start getting shorter. They are most severe during December, January and February. It’s sometimes known as ‘winter depression’.
In most cases, the symptoms of SAD begin to improve in the spring before disappearing.
Symptoms of SAD
If you have SAD, you may experience symptoms like:
low mood
a loss of pleasure or interest in everyday activities
irritability
feelings of despair, guilt and worthlessness
low self-esteem
indecisiveness
tearfulness
stress
anxiety
a
reduced sex drive
You may also:
be less active than normal
feel tired and sleep more than normal (hypersomnia)
feel lethargic (lack energy)
find it difficult to concentrate
have an increased appetite and eat more than usual (hyperphagia)
For many people, SAD can have a significant effect on their day-to-day life.
Contact your GP practice if:
your mental health is affecting your daily life
you’re not looking after yourself
you’re finding it hard to manage any responsibilities you have
Find out how to get urgent help for your mental health
What causes SAD?
The exact cause of SAD is unknown. The symptoms of depression are thought to be linked to less exposure to sunlight.
One theory is that a lack of light in the winter months affects your mood, sleep and appetite, affecting how you feel.
Diagnosing SAD
SAD is often difficult to diagnose because the there are many other types of depression that have similar symptoms. It may take several years before you and your GP realise that your symptoms are forming a regular pattern.
Your GP might carry out a psychological assessment to check your mental health. During the assessment, you may be asked questions about:
your mood
your lifestyle
your eating patterns
your sleeping patterns
any seasonal changes in your thoughts and behaviour
your personal history
family history
Your GP may also carry out a brief physical examination to check for any other reasons for your symptoms.
A diagnosis of SAD will depend on whether:
you’ve had symptoms during the same seasons for 2 or more years in a row
your periods of depression are followed by periods without depression
there are any other reasons for your seasonal mood changes
Treatment for SAD
Your GP will recommend the most suitable treatment option for you. This may involve using a combination of treatments to get the best results.
Self help for SAD
Work through our self help guide for depression that uses cognitive behavioural therapy.
Start our self help guide for depression
Change Mental Health has some tips for managing SAD
Talking therapy
You might be offered cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) which is a type of
talking therapy
. It helps you change how you think and react to situations that are making you unhappy.
Counselling is another type of talking therapy where you talk to a trained counsellor about your worries and problems.
Light therapy for SAD
Light therapy simulates the sunlight that’s missing during the darker winter months.
However, there’s mixed evidence about the effectiveness of light therapy.
Light therapy may be more effective if used first thing in the morning. Some people find looking at a very bright light uncomfortable.
Light therapy produces short-term results. It may help to relieve your current symptoms, but you may still be affected by SAD next winter.
Trying light therapy
When buying a light box, make sure that you choose one that is:
made by a fully certified manufacturer
medically proven to treat SAD
The
SAD Association
can provide a list of recommended manufacturers.
Very bright light may not be suitable if you:
have an eye problem or your eyes are particularly sensitive to light
are taking certain types of medication, such as antidepressants
have
epilepsy
Speak to your GP if you’re unsure about a particular product or if you experience any side effects while using light therapy.
Antidepressants for SAD
Antidepressants are often only prescribed for SAD when the symptoms are severe. This is because there’s limited evidence that they’re effective.
It’s thought that they are most effective if they’re taken at the start of winter (before the symptoms appear) and continued until spring.
It can take between 4 and 6 weeks for antidepressants to take full effect. It’s also important to continue to take the medication as prescribed, even if you start to feel better.
Read more about antidepressants
Source:
NHS 24