Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/mental-health/self-harm/

---

Self-harm
Self-harm is when somebody intentionally damages or injures their body.
Self-harming has been described as a “physical expression of emotional distress”. If somebody is feeling unhappy emotions, they may find that the physical act of hurting themselves makes them feel better.
Where to get help for self-harm
Help is available for anyone who self harms, as well as their family and friends.
Speak to your GP practice if you’re:
harming yourself
having thoughts about harming yourself
worried about minor injuries like small cuts or burns – without treatment they might become infected
If your GP practice is closed, you can phone NHS 24 on 111.
Some people who self-harm are at a higher risk of suicide. It’s important to get support as soon as possible to prevent suicidal thoughts.
Find out how to get urgent help for your mental health
Who to contact if you need someone to talk to
There are organisations that offer confidential support from trained volunteers.
You can contact these free services to talk about anything.
Samaritans
Talk to
Samaritans
at any time by phoning 116 123, emailing jo@samaritans.org, or by letter, webchat or face to face
Breathing Space
Contact
Breathing Space
on 0800 83 65 67 or use their webchat – Breathing Space is open Monday to Thursday 6pm to 2am and from 6pm Friday until 6am on Monday
Calm
Phone 0800 585 858 to talk to
Calm
(if you’re 15 years old or over) or contact them on WhatsApp or through their webchat, both available from 5pm to midnight
Childline
If you’re under 19, you can call 0800 1111 to talk to
Childline
. The number will not appear on your phone bill.
How to get immediate help
Phone 999 or go to A&E if you or someone else:
has taken an overdose of drugs, alcohol or prescription medication
is in a lot of pain
is having difficulty breathing
is losing a lot of blood from a cut or wound
is in shock after a serious cut or burn
You should also phone 999 if someone else is unconscious.
Signs of self-harm
There are many different forms of self-harm and they are not always easy to notice.
Types of self-harm may include:
cutting
burning
punching
poisoning
misusing alcohol
or drugs
starving or bingeing
People often try to keep self-harm a secret because of shame or fear of discovery.
If you think that a friend or relative is self-harming, look out for any of the following signs like:
unexplained cuts, bruises or cigarette burns, usually on their wrists, arms, thighs and chest
keeping themselves covered at all times, even in hot weather
unusual eating behaviour
the person is blaming themselves unreasonably
they have been pulling out their hair
The person self-harming may feel deep shame and guilt. They might feel confused and worried by their own behaviour. It’s important to approach them with care and understanding.
They may not wish to discuss their self-harm with you. You could suggest that they speak to an anonymous helpline or see their GP.
Why people self-harm
People may self-harm for different reasons. Some examples of reasons people self-harm can include:
to express or cope with emotional distress
to express deep emotional feelings like low self esteem
to try to feel in control
to cope with a traumatic event like the loss of a loved one
as a way of punishing themselves
as a cry for help
as a response to intrusive thoughts
Self-harm is an expression of personal distress, rather than an illness. It can be linked to other mental health conditions like depression.
Examples of emotional distress
The distress from a traumatic experience or an unhappy situation can lead to feelings of low self-esteem or self-hatred.
There are many possible causes of emotional distress. It might be a build-up of many smaller things that leads people to think about self-harm.
Some examples include:
difficult relationships with friends or partners
problems or pressures at school or work
being bullied
money worries
alcohol or drug misuse
coming to terms with your sexuality
coping with cultural expectations, for example, an arranged marriage
sexual, physical or emotional abuse, including domestic abuse and rape
the death of a close family member or friend
having a miscarriage
low self esteem
struggling with stress, anxiety or depression
Treatment for self-harm
It’s important for anyone who self-harms to see their GP. Your GP will aim to treat the underlying emotional cause as well as any physical injury.
Your GP is likely to ask you about your feelings in some detail. They’ll want to establish why you self-harm, what triggers it and how you feel afterwards. Your GP may ask you some questions to see if you have an underlying condition.
You may also have your height, weight and blood pressure checked. You may be asked about any drinking or drug-taking habits.
It’s important that you’re honest with your GP. If you don’t know why you self-harm, tell your GP this.
Specialist referral
You might be able to stop self harming by learning to manage your feelings in healthier ways, for example, by talking to others.
Your GP may refer you to a mental health professional. This could be:
a counsellor – somebody who is trained in
talking therapies
a psychiatrist – a doctor with further training in treating mental health conditions
a
psychologist
– a health professional who specialises in managing mental health conditions
If you have another condition that’s linked to your self-harming, you may be referred to a specialist who can help treat the condition. For example, if you have anorexia nervosa, you might see a specialist in eating disorders and a dietitian or nutritionist (somebody who specialises in nutrition).
It might also be recommended that you attend a self-help group. For example you might attend Alcoholics Anonymous if you’re misusing alcohol. You might attend Narcotics Anonymous if you’re misusing drugs. These groups can offer support as you try to stop your self-harming behaviour.
Assessment
You may be offered a psychosocial assessment. This aims to investigate all the factors that contribute to your self-harming, including:
social factors – for example, your relationships with others
psychological factors – your feelings and emotions
motivational factors – what made you want to do it
You’ll be asked about your current feelings, like if you’re feeling hopeless or considering suicide. If you have any other symptoms you’ll also be asked about these.
Any further treatment will, if possible, be decided jointly between you and your mental health professional. It’ll be a specific programme for you according to your needs and what’s likely to be effective. You’ll be asked for your consent before any treatment begins.
Source:
NHS 24