Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/blood-and-lymph/sepsis/

---

Sepsis
About sepsis
Symptoms of sepsis
Treating sepsis
About sepsis
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
you have cold, clammy and pale or mottled skin – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
you have a rash that does not fade when a glass is rolled over it, or looks like bruising or bleeding under the skin
Always trust your instincts and phone 999 if you think there’s an emergency.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if your child:
is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do – they may find it difficult to focus on you or are more difficult to wake up than usual
has severe difficulty breathing – they may make grunting noises or suck their stomach in under their ribcage
is breathing fast or stops or pauses
is pulling in at their throat area (tracheal tug) or their windpipe is more prominent
has a fit (
febrile seizure
) for the first time (they cannot stop shaking
has lips or skin that are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of their hands
has a weak, high-pitched cry that’s not like their normal cry
has cold, clammy and pale or mottled skin – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
has a rash that does not fade when you press a glass against it (use the ‘
glass test
‘ from Meningitis Now)
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 38°C (101°F) or above and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 36°C (97°F) or less and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
Contact your GP practice urgently if you or your child:
are feeling confused, dizzy, or lightheaded
has difficulty breathing – you may be more short of breath than usual
has pain when breathing in or coughing
are peeing less than usual – this can be a sign of
dehydration
has had a dry nappy for 12 hours or more, or is showing other signs of
dehydration
has a
high temperature
that has lasted for more than 5 days
has severe muscle pain
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
has pain or swelling in the arms or legs
has other signs of illness, such as a
rash
, as well as a high temperature – for example, you feel either hot or cold to touch or you’re shivering
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Trust your instincts and phone 111 if your child’s symptoms are getting worse or they are sicker than you’d expect (even if their temperature falls).
What is sepsis?
Sepsis is a serious complication of an infection.
Without quick treatment, sepsis can lead to multiple organ failure and death.
What causes a sepsis infection?
The immune system usually keeps an infection limited to one place. This is called a localised infection. To do this, the body produces white blood cells.
White blood cells travel to an infection site to destroy the germs causing the infection. This triggers tissue swelling, known as inflammation. This helps to fight the infection and prevent it from spreading.
However, an infection can spread to other parts of the body if the immune system is weak or an infection is severe.
Widespread inflammation can damage tissue and interfere with blood flow. When blood flow is interrupted, blood pressure can drop dangerously low. This stops oxygen from reaching the organs and tissues.
Sources of infection
Sepsis can be triggered by an infection in any part of the body. The most common sites of infection that lead to sepsis are the:
lungs
urinary tract
tummy (abdomen)
pelvis
However, sometimes the specific infection and source of sepsis can’t be identified.
Infections linked to sepsis
appendicitis – infection in the appendix
cellulitis – a skin infection that can be caused by an intravenous
catheter
that’s been inserted through the skin to give fluids or medication
cholangitis – an infection of the bile duct
cholecystitis – an infection of the gallbladder
encephalitis – an infection of the brain and nervous system
endocarditis – a heart infection
flu – only in some cases
meningitis – an infection of the brain and nervous system
peritonitis – an infection of the thin layer of tissue that lines the abdomen
pneumonia – a lung infection
post-surgery infections
osteomyelitis – a bone infection
urinary tract infection – an infection of the bladder, urethra or kidneys
Tests to diagnose sepsis
Sepsis is often diagnosed by testing your:
temperature
heart rate
breathing rate
blood
Other tests can help determine the type of infection, where it’s located and which parts of the body have been affected. These include:
urine or stool samples
a wound culture – where a small sample of tissue, skin or fluid is taken from the affected area for testing
respiratory secretion testing – taking a sample of saliva, phlegm or mucus
blood pressure tests
imaging studies – like an
X-ray
,
ultrasound scan
or
computerised tomography (CT) scan
Who’s at risk of sepsis?
Anyone can develop sepsis after an injury or minor infection. However, some people are more vulnerable, including people who:
are very young
are very old
are pregnant
have had a urinary catheter fitted
have a long term health condition like diabetes
have recently had surgery
are genetically prone to infections
are already in hospital with a serious illness
have to stay in hospital for a long time
have wounds or injuries as a result of an accident
have a medical condition that weakens the immune system – like
HIV
or leukaemia
are receiving medical treatment that weakens the immune system – like
chemotherapy
or long-term steroids
are on mechanical ventilation – where a machine is used to help you breathe
Recovering from sepsis
Some people make a full recovery from sepsis fairly quickly. The amount of time it takes to fully recover from sepsis varies depending on:
the severity of the sepsis
the person’s overall health
how much time was spent in hospital
whether treatment was needed in an intensive care unit (ICU)
Long term effects of sepsis
Some people with sepsis will experience long-term physical and psychological problems. This is known as post-sepsis syndrome.
Symptoms of post-sepsis syndrome include:
feeling lethargic or excessively tired
muscle weakness
swollen limbs
joint pain
chest pain
breathlessness
Symptoms of sepsis
Sepsis can cause a variety of symptoms.
Sepsis symptoms in children under 5
Temperature
over 38C (babies under 3 months)
over 39C (babies aged 3 to 6 months)
below 36C – check 3 times in a 10-minute period
a high temperature in a child who can’t be encouraged to show interest in anything
Breathing
difficulty breathing – this looks like hard work
grunting with every breath
struggling to speak more than a few words at once (for older children who normally talk)
breathing that obviously “pauses”
Eating and drinking
no interest in feeding (child under 1 month)
not drinking for more than 8 hours (when awake)
black, green or bloody vomit
Body
a soft spot on a baby’s head that bulges
“sunken” eyes
a baby that’s floppy
a child that can’t be encouraged to show interest in anything
weak, whining or continuous crying in a younger child
confusion in an older child
irritableness
unresponsive
stiffness in the neck, especially when trying to look up or down
not had a wee or wet nappy for 12 hours
Sepsis symptoms in older children and adults
Early symptoms of sepsis may include:
a high temperature (fever) or low body temperature
chills and shivering
a fast heartbeat
fast breathing
Symptoms of severe sepsis or septic shock
In some cases, symptoms of more severe sepsis or
septic shock
(when your blood pressure drops to a dangerously low level) develop.
These can include:
feeling dizzy or faint
a change in mental state – like confusion or disorientation
diarrhoea
nausea and vomiting
slurred speech
severe muscle pain
severe breathlessness
less urine production than normal – for example, not urinating for a day
cold, clammy and pale or mottled skin
loss of consciousness
Treating sepsis
Treatment for sepsis varies, depending on the:
area affected
cause of the infection
organs affected
extent of any damage
If you have the early signs of sepsis, you’ll usually be referred to hospital. You’ll then be given a diagnosis and treatment.
Emergency treatment
You’ll need emergency treatment, or treatment in an intensive care unit (ICU), if:
the sepsis is severe
you develop
septic shock
– when your blood pressure drops to a dangerously low level
ICUs can support body functions like breathing that are affected by sepsis. This allows the medical staff to focus on treating the infection.
Sepsis is treatable if it’s identified and treated quickly. In most cases it leads to full recovery with no lasting problems.
Antibiotics
The main treatment for sepsis, severe sepsis or septic shock is
antibiotics
. These will be given directly into a vein (intravenously).
Ideally, antibiotic treatment should start within an hour of diagnosis.
Intravenous antibiotics are usually replaced by tablets after 2 to 4 days. You may have to take them for 7 to 10 days or longer, depending on the severity of your condition.
Types of antibiotics
If sepsis is suspected, broad-spectrum antibiotics are given first. This is because there won’t be time to wait until a specific type of infection has been identified.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics work against a wide range of known infectious bacteria. They usually cure most common infections.
Once a specific bacterium has been identified, a more focused antibiotic can be used.
Viral infections
If the sepsis is caused by a virus, antibiotics won’t work. However, it would be too dangerous to delay treatment to find out the specific cause. This means antibiotics are usually given anyway.
With a viral infection, you’ll need to wait until your immune system starts to tackle it. However, antiviral medication may be given in some cases.
Intravenous fluids
If you have sepsis, your body needs more fluid to prevent dehydration and kidney failure.
If you have severe sepsis or septic shock, you’ll usually be given fluids intravenously for the first 24 to 48 hours.
It’s important that the doctors know how much urine your kidneys are making when you have sepsis. This helps them spot signs of kidney failure.
If you’re admitted with severe sepsis or septic shock, you’ll usually be given
a catheter
. This is inserted into your bladder to monitor your urine output.
Oxygen
Your body’s oxygen demand goes up if you have sepsis.
If you’re admitted to hospital with sepsis and the level of oxygen in your blood is low, you’ll usually be given oxygen. This is given through a mask or tubes in your nostrils.
Treating the source of infection
If a source of the infection can be identified, like an abscess or infected wound, this will also need to be treated.
For example, any pus may need to be drained away. In more serious cases, surgery may be needed to remove the infected tissue and repair any damage.
Increasing blood pressure
Medications called vasopressors are used if you have
low blood pressure
caused by sepsis.
Vasopressors are normally given intravenously while you’re in an ICU. Extra fluids may also be given intravenously to help increase blood pressure.
Other treatments
You may require additional treatments like:
corticosteroids
insulin medication
a blood transfusion
mechanical ventilation – where a machine is used to help you breathe
dialysis
– where a machine filters your blood to copy the function of your kidneys
These treatments are mostly used in ICUs.
Source:
NHS 24