Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/shigella/

---

Shigella
Shigella is a bowel infection that can cause severe
diarrhoea
. It’s caused by bacteria called shigella.
Shigella bacteria is most commonly found in faeces (poo). It’s usually caused by food contamination.
Anyone can get shigella, however it’s most common in young children.
Shigella can also be passed on through sex.
Symptoms of shigella
Most people with shigella infection have mild symptoms that settle within a few days.
Symptoms of shigella include:
watery
diarrhoea
– sometimes containing blood, mucus or pus in severe cases
feeling sick or
being sick
abdominal pain
high temperature (
fever
) over 38°C (100.4°F)
feeling down or depressed
Symptoms usually start 1 to 3 days after infection and can last up to 1 week.
When to get medical advice
Contact your GP practice if:
Contact your GP practice if:
you have symptoms of shigella
you have diarrhoea that contains blood
you’re worried about your symptoms
Contact your local sexual health service if:
you have symptoms of shigella and you think it was passed on during sex
Diagnosing shigella
When you visit your GP or nurse, they’ll discuss your symptoms and ask about your recent travel history. You should also tell your GP or nurse if you think you have got the infection from sex.
They may recommend further tests to confirm shigella infection.
Testing for shigella infection involves sending a sample to a lab for analysis.
The 2 main ways the sample can be collected are:
a stool (poo) sample
using a swab – a small cotton bud is gently wiped over the area that might be infected, like inside the anus
Treatment for shigella
Shigella infection usually clears up itself without any treatment. However, if your symptoms are severe or continue after 1 week, your GP may prescribe
antibiotics
.
How shigella is passed on
Shigella is passed on from person to person through poor hygiene measures. For example, not washing your hands thoroughly after using the toilet.
In Scotland, most cases of shigella infection are passed on through families and where people are in close contact like schools and nurseries. It’s mostly caused by contaminated food but it can also be passed on sexually.
Sex that may involve contact with faeces (poo) can cause shigella to be passed on. This includes:
anal sex
oral sex which involves licking the anus (rimming)
fisting
touching a condom or sex toy that’s been used for anal sex
having oral sex after anal sex
You could be at higher risk if you are a
man who has sex with men
.
How to prevent shigella
There are things you can do to help prevent shigella infection.
Do
wash your hands regularly, especially before preparing food and after using the toilet
wash your hands after sex, especially if you’re touching someone’s anus or handling used condoms or sex toys
use condoms for anal sex
use dental dams for rimming
Don’t
do not prepare or serve food for others until your symptoms have stopped for 48 hours
do not use swimming pools, hot tubs or water parks until 48 hours after your symptoms have stopped
do not attend school, work or other group activities until 48 hours after your symptoms have stopped
do not drink tap water in countries with poor sanitation systems
Source:
Scottish Government