Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/lungs-and-airways/shortness-of-breath/

---

Shortness of breath
It’s normal to get out of breath when you’ve overexerted yourself. But when breathlessness comes on suddenly and unexpectedly, it’s usually a sign of a medical condition.
When to get medical advice
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you have severe difficulty breathing – for example, you struggle to speak without pausing, gasping or choking
you have severe
chest pain
in the middle of your chest that isn’t going away – it may feel like pressure, tightness or squeezing
you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw
you feel more drowsy than usual or find it more difficult to wake up
your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of your hands
Your child is short of breath and:
their lips or skin are turning pale, blue or grey – on brown or black skin this is easier to see on the palms of their hands
is breathing fast or stops or pauses
has severe difficulty breathing – they may make grunting noises or suck their stomach in under their ribcage
is pulling in at their throat area (tracheal tug) or their windpipe is more prominent
is limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do – they may find it difficult to focus on you or are more difficult to wake up than usual
Contact your GP practice urgently if you or your child:
have difficulty breathing – you may be more short of breath than usual
have pain when breathing in or coughing
are feeling confused, dizzy, or lightheaded
feel sick or are being sick – for example, you can’t keep food or fluids down
are coughing up blood (haemoptysis)
have pain or swelling in 1 of your legs
have
heart palpitations
– this may feel like your heart is racing, going too slowly or skipping a beat or like a fluttering feeling in your chest
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Speak to your GP practice if you or your child:
have symptoms that are not improving
have had a
cough
for more than 3 weeks
Your doctor may ask you some questions, such as:
did the breathlessness come on suddenly or slowly?
did anything trigger it, such as exercise?
how bad is it?
does it only happen when you’ve been active, or when you’re not doing anything?
is there any pain when you breathe?
do you have a cough?
do certain positions make it worse – for example, can you lie down?
Feeling like you can’t get enough air can be scary. Make sure you get help from a healthcare professional. They may give you extra oxygen to breathe if you need it.
What causes sudden shortness of breath?
There are different health conditions that can cause sudden and unexpected breathlessness.
A problem with your lungs or airways
Sudden breathlessness could be an
asthma
attack. You’ll feel breathless because it’s difficult to move air in and out of your airways. Your GP may advise you to use a spacer device with your inhaler to help your breathlessness.
Pneumonia
(lung inflammation) may also cause shortness of breath and a
cough
. It’s usually caused by an infection, so you’ll need to take
antibiotics
.
If you have
COPD
, it’s likely your breathlessness is a sign this condition has suddenly got worse.
A heart problem
It’s possible to have a
heart attack
without having all the obvious symptoms, such as chest pain and anxiety.
In this case, shortness of breath may be the only warning sign you’re having a heart attack. If you or your GP think this is the case, they’ll give you
aspirin
and admit you to hospital straight away.
Heart failure
can also cause breathing difficulties. Heart failure means your heart cannot pump enough blood around your body. It’s usually because the heart muscle has become too weak or stiff to work properly. It leads to a build-up of fluid inside the lungs, which makes breathing more difficult. Lifestyle changes and medicines or surgery will help the heart pump better and relieve your breathlessness.
Breathlessness could also be linked to a problem with your heart rate or rhythm. For example,
atrial fibrillation
(an irregular and fast heart rate) or
supraventricular tachycardia
(regular and fast heart rate).
Panic attack or anxiety
A
panic attack
or anxiety can cause you to take rapid or deep breaths, known as hyperventilating. Concentrating on slow breathing or breathing through a paper bag can bring your breathing back to normal. This should only be done when you are sure that anxiety is the cause of your breathlessness.
More unusual causes
More unusual causes include:
a severe allergic reaction
(anaphylaxis)
pneumothorax – partial collapse of your lung caused by a small tear in the lung surface, which allows air to become trapped in the space around your lungs
pulmonary embolism – a blockage in one of the blood vessels in the lung
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
– a condition that causes scarring of the lungs
pleural effusion – excess fluid next to the lung
diabetic ketoacidosis – a complication of diabetes where acids build up in your blood and urine
What causes long-term breathlessness?
Long-term breathlessness is usually caused by:
obesity
being unfit
poorly controlled
asthma
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
anaemia
heart failure
a problem with your heart rate or rhythm
More unusual causes of long-term breathlessness are:
bronchiectasis
a blockage in a blood vessel in the lung (pulmonary embolism)
partial collapse of your lung caused by
lung cancer
excess fluid next to the lung (pleural effusion)
narrowing of the main heart valve, restricting blood flow to the rest of the body
having
panic attacks
often
Source:
Scottish Government