Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/sinusitis/

---

Sinusitis
Sinusitis is inflammation (redness and swelling) of the sinuses. The sinuses are small, air-filled spaces in your cheekbones and forehead. Inflammation blocks the sinuses so mucus cannot drain into your nose as usual.
Sinusitis is usually caused by a viral infection. It’s common and usually gets better within 2 to 3 weeks.
Symptoms of sinusitis
Sinusitis usually occurs after an infection, such as a
cold
.
Symptoms of sinusitis include:
a green or yellow discharge from your nose
a blocked nose
pain and tenderness around your cheeks, eyes or forehead
a high temperature (fever) of 38°C (100.4°F) or more
toothache
a reduced sense of smell
bad breath (halitosis)
Children with sinusitis may:
be irritable
breathe through their mouth
have difficulty feeding
sound nasal when they speak, as though they have a stuffy cold
The symptoms of sinusitis often clear up within a few weeks (acute sinusitis). Occasionally they can last 3 months or more (chronic sinusitis).
When to get medical advice
If your symptoms are mild and getting better, you can often treat sinusitis without seeing a GP.
Speak to your GP practice if:
your symptoms are severe or getting worse
your symptoms haven’t started to improve after around 7 to 10 days
you keep getting sinusitis
Diagnosing sinusitis
Your GP will usually be able to diagnose sinusitis from your symptoms and by examining the inside of your nose.
If you keep getting sinusitis, or its severe, they may refer you to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist.
Treatment for sinusitis
Sinusitis usually gets better on its own within 2 or 3 weeks.
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Do
get plenty of rest
drink plenty of fluids
take over-the-counter painkillers such as paracetamol or
ibuprofen
(do not give aspirin to children under 16)
use nasal
decongestants
– these shouldn’t be used for more than a week, as this might make things worse
hold warm packs to your face
clean your nose with a salt water solution – you can make yourself or buy sachets from a pharmacy
Always read the leaflet that comes with your medicine before taking it. Follow the recommended dosage instructions. If you’re not sure which treatments are suitable for you or your child,
speak to a pharmacist
for advice.
How to clean your nose with a homemade salt water solution
Boil a pint of water, then leave it to cool.
Mix 1 teaspoon of salt and 1 teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda into the water.
Wash your hands.
Stand over a sink, cup the palm of 1 hand and pour a small amount of the solution into it.
Sniff the water into 1 nostril at a time. Breathe through your mouth and allow the water to pour back into the sink. Try not to let the water go down the back of your throat.
Repeat the first 5 steps up to 3 times a day until your nose feels more comfortable.
You do not need to use all of the solution, but make a fresh solution each time you clean your nose.
Treatments from your doctor
If your symptoms aren’t improving or are getting worse, your GP may prescribe
antibiotics
tablets or
corticosteroid
spray or drops.
If your symptoms still don’t get better, you may be referred to an ENT specialist for surgery to improve the drainage of your sinuses.
What causes sinusitis?
Sinusitis is usually caused by a
cold
or
flu
virus spreading to the sinuses from the upper airways. Only a few cases are caused by bacteria infecting the sinuses.
An infected tooth or fungal infection can also occasionally cause the sinuses to become inflamed.
Chronic sinusitis
It’s not clear exactly what causes sinusitis to become chronic (long-lasting), but it may be related to:
allergies
and related conditions, including allergic rhinitis,
asthma
and
hay fever
nasal polyps (benign growths inside the nose)
smoking
a weakened immune system
Controlling underlying conditions like allergies may improve the symptoms of chronic sinusitis.
Source:
ENT Scotland