Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/skin-rashes-in-children/

---

Skin rashes in children
Childhood rashes are common and are often nothing to worry about. This page covers some common causes of rashes in children.
Phone 999 or go to A&E now if:
Your child is unwell with a rash and:
has a stiff neck
is bothered by light
seems confused
has a high temperature
has difficulty breathing (you may notice grunting noises or their tummy sucking under their ribs), breathlessness, or they’re breathing very fast
has a rash that looks like small bruises or bleeding under the skin and does not fade when you press a glass against it
their skin, lips or tongue look pale, blue, grey or blotchy
On brown and black skin, it may be easier to see the rash or colour changes on the soles of the feet, palms, lips, tongue and inside the eyelids.
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or phone 111 if:
you’re worried about your child’s rash and you’re not sure what to do
Cellulitis
Cellulitis is an infection of the deeper layers of skin and underlying tissue.
Cellulitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection. The bacteria can infect the deeper layers of your skin if it’s broken by a cut, for example.
Symptoms and treatments for cellulitis
Symptoms
The affected area will be:
red
painful
swollen
hot
It often affects the legs, but can occur anywhere on the body. Your child will probably also have a fever.
See your GP practice immediately if an area of your child’s skin suddenly turns red, hot and tender. If you can’t see your GP on the same day, go to a walk-in centre or minor injuries unit.
Treatments
Cellulitis can usually be diagnosed by assessing the symptoms and examining the skin. It usually responds well to treatment with antibiotics.
Find out more about cellulitis
Chickenpox
Chickenpox is a viral illness that most children catch. It’s most likely to affect children under 10.
Chickenpox causes a rash of red, itchy spots that turn into fluid-filled blisters. They then crust over to form scabs, which eventually drop off.
Symptoms and treatments for chickenpox
Symptoms
An itchy, spotty rash is the main symptom of chickenpox. It can be anywhere on the body. Some children only have a few spots. Others have them all over their body.
The spots turn into fluid-filled blisters. This can be very itchy and some may burst.
These spots crust over to form scabs, which after a while drop off.
Treatments
There’s no treatment for chickenpox. But, you can get remedies from your pharmacy that can help symptoms. These include:
paracetamol
to help bring down a fever
calamine lotion and cooling gels to ease itching
Find out more about chickenpox
Eczema
The most common type of eczema is atopic eczema. This mostly affects children but can continue into adulthood.
Atopic eczema causes itchy, red, dry and cracked skin.
Symptoms and treatments for eczema
Symptoms
Eczema is a long-term condition that causes the skin to become:
itchy
red
dry
cracked
Atopic eczema often develops on the:
backs of the knees
elbows
neck
eyes
ears
Eczema isn’t a serious condition but if your child becomes infected with the herpes simplex virus, it can cause the eczema to flare up into an outbreak of tiny blisters. This is called eczema herpeticum and will cause a fever.
Treatments
Creams and ointments can help eczema symptoms like itching and redness.
You should speak to your GP if you think your child has eczema. They’ll be able to tell you what’s the most suitable treatment.
Find out more about eczema
Erythema multiforme
Erythema multiforme is a skin rash. It’s caused by an allergic reaction to the
herpes simplex virus
and is usually mild.
The rash usually appears on your hands and feet, and spreads to your tummy, chest, back or face. It might feel itchy or like it’s burning.
Symptoms and treatments for erythema multiforme
Erythema multiforme causes spots. These look like targets with a dark red centre and paler ring around the outside.
The hands or feet are usually affected first, followed by the limbs, upper body and face.
Your child will probably feel unwell and may have a fever.
In rare cases, erythema multiforme can be triggered by a reaction to certain medications. This can include antibiotics or anticonvulsants. This more severe form is called Stevens-Johnson syndrome and it can be life-threatening.
Treatment
You should speak to your GP practice if your child has a rash and seems unwell.
Hand, foot and mouth disease
Hand, foot and mouth disease is a common, contagious infection. It’s most common in young children (particularly those under 10) but it can also affect older children and adults.
Hand, foot and mouth disease causes mouth ulcers and spots on the hands and feet.
Symptoms and treatments for hand, foot and mouth disease
Symptoms
Hand, foot and mouth disease causes:
mouth ulcers
spots and blisters on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet
Treatments
There’s no cure for hand, foot and mouth disease. The immune system will fight the virus and it should clear up after about 7 to 10 days.
Hand, foot and mouth disease spreads easily. This means you should keep your child away from school or nursery until they’re better.
Make sure your child drinks plenty of fluid. If eating and swallowing is uncomfortable, give them soft foods like mashed potatoes, yoghurt and soup.
Find out more about hand, foot and mouth disease
Impetigo
Impetigo is a common and highly contagious skin infection.
Impetigo sores usually affect the hands and face, particularly around the nose and mouth.
Symptoms and treatments for impetigo
Symptoms
Impetigo causes sores and blisters.
There are 2 types of impetigo called:
non-bullous
bullous
Non-bullous impetigo usually affects the skin around the nose and mouth. It causes sores that burst quickly to leave a yellow-brown crust.
Bullous impetigo typically affects the trunk (the area of the body between the waist and neck). It causes fluid-filled blisters that burst after a few days to leave a yellow crust.
Treatments
Speak to your GP or pharmacist if you think your child has impetigo.
An
antibiotic
cream or tablets will be prescribed. This should reduce the length of the illness to around 7 to 10 days.
Impetigo isn’t usually serious and often improves within a week of treatment.
Find out more about impetigo
Hives (urticaria)
Hives is a common skin reaction that often affects children. It can be known as:
hives
urticaria
weals
welts
nettle rash
Hives can cause a rash with small, circular patches of raised skin.
Symptoms and treatments for hives
Symptoms
Hives is a raised, itchy rash. It can affect one part of the body or be spread across large areas.
It occurs when a trigger causes high levels of histamine and other chemicals to be released in the skin. These substances cause the blood vessels in the skin to open up, resulting in:
redness or pinkness
swelling
itchiness
There are many possible triggers of hives, including:
allergens, like food or latex
irritants, like nettles or medicines
physical factors, like heat or exercise
Sometimes a cause of hives can’t be identified.
Treatments
A hives rash is usually short-lived and mild. It can often be controlled with antihistamines.
Find out more about hives
Keratosis pilaris (‘chicken skin’)
Keratosis pilaris is a common and harmless skin condition. It usually begins in childhood and gets worse during puberty. Some people find it improves after this and may even disappear in adulthood.
Keratosis pilaris causes small, painless bumps on your skin.
Symptoms and treatments for keratosis pilaris
Symptoms
The skin on the back of the upper arms becomes rough and bumpy, as if it’s covered in permanent goose pimples. Sometimes other areas of the body can be affected like the:
buttocks
thighs
forearms
upper back
Treatments
There’s no cure for keratosis pilaris. It often gets better on its own without treatment.
But, there are some things you can do that may improve your child’s rash. You could use:
non-soap cleansers rather than soap
an emollient to moisturise their skin
Your GP or pharmacist will be able to recommend a suitable cream.
Measles
Measles is a highly infectious illness that most often affects young children. It’s now rare in the UK because of the effectiveness of the
measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine
.
The spots of the measles rash are sometimes raised and join together to form blotchy patches. They’re not usually itchy.
Symptoms and treatments for measles
Symptoms
The measles rash is red-brown blotches. It usually starts on the head or upper neck and then spreads outwards to the rest of the body.
Your child may also have a fever and
cold-like symptoms.
Treatments
Phone your GP practice immediately if you think your child has measles.
It’s best to phone before visiting your GP practice as they may need to make special arrangements. This’ll help to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others.
Measles usually passes in about 7 to 10 days without causing further problems.
Paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
can be used to relieve fever, aches and pains. You should also make sure that your child drinks plenty of water to avoid
dehydration
.
Find out more about measles
Molluscum contagiosum
Molluscum contagiosum is a viral skin infection. It often affects young children aged between 1 to 5. They usually catch it after close physical contact with another infected child.
Most adults are resistant to the virus. This means they’re unlikely to catch it if they come into contact with it.
A molluscum contagiosum rash causes spots that are about 2 to 5 mm wide. They’re raised and dome-shaped with a shiny white dimple in the centre.
Symptoms and treatments for molluscum contagiosum
Symptoms
Molluscum contagiosum causes clusters of small, firm, raised spots on the skin.
The condition is usually painless, although some children may experience some itchiness.
Treatments
Molluscum contagiosum usually goes away within 18 months without the need for treatment.
Pityriasis rosea
Pityriasis rosea is a relatively common skin condition. Most cases occur in older children and young adults (aged between 10 and 35).
A pityriasis rosea rash is usually ring-shaped. It can grow or spread and there may be more than one rash.
Symptoms and treatments for pityriasis rosea
Symptoms
It causes a temporary rash of raised, red scaly patches. The rash can be very itchy.
Treatment
In most cases, pityriasis rosea clears up without treatment. It usually takes 2 to 12 weeks to clear but in rare cases it can last up to 5 months.
Emollients,
steroid creams
and antihistamines can be used to help relieve the itchiness.
The rash doesn’t usually leave scars but, the skin can sometimes be discoloured afterwards.
Prickly heat (heat rash)
Prickly heat (heat rash) is also known as miliaria. It occurs when the sweat ducts in the outer layer of skin (epidermis) are obstructed.
A heat rash causes spots that are 2 to 4 mm wide. Some spots may be filled with fluid.
Symptoms and treatments for prickly heat
Symptoms
Heat rash is an itchy rash of small, raised red spots. It causes a stinging or prickly sensation on the skin.
You can get a heat rash anywhere on your body but it often affects the:
face
neck
back
chest
thighs
Infants can sometimes get a prickly heat rash if they sweat more than usual. For example, when it’s hot and humid or if they’re overdressed.
Treatments
Heat rash isn’t a serious condition and rarely requires any specific treatment.
Psoriasis
Psoriasis
is a long-lasting (chronic) skin condition.
Psoriasis causes areas of red, flaky and crusty skin.
Symptoms and treatments for psoriasis
Symptoms
Psoriasis causes red, flaky, crusty patches of skin covered with silvery scales.
The severity of psoriasis varies from person to person.
Treatments
There’s no cure for psoriasis but there are treatments to help improve the symptoms and appearance of skin patches. This includes topical corticosteroids like creams and ointments.
Find out more about psoriasis
Ringworm
Ringworm is a highly infectious fungal skin infection.
Ringworm can cause a ring-shaped rash that’s red or silvery.
Symptoms and treatments for ringworm
Symptoms
Ringworm causes a ring-like red or silvery patch on the skin that can be scaly, inflamed or itchy. It often affects the arms and legs, but it can appear almost anywhere on the body.
Other similar fungal infections can affect the scalp, feet, groin and nails.
Treatments
Ringworm can usually be easily treated with antifungal medicines. These are available from a pharmacy.
Ringworm of the scalp can cause scaling and patches of hair loss. It’s treated with antifungal tablets, often combined with antifungal shampoo.
Find out more about ringworm
Scabies
Scabies is a contagious skin condition. It’s caused by tiny mites that burrow into the skin.
In children, scabies is usually spread through long periods of skin-to-skin contact with an infected adult or child. For example, during play fighting or hugging.
A scabies rash can appear anywhere but it’s common between the fingers.
Symptoms and treatments for scabies
Symptoms
Scabies mites leave small, red blotches. These are often found on the palms of the hands or the soles of the feet. In infants, blisters are often found on the soles of the feet.
A scabies rash can be very itchy.
Treatments
Speak to your GP practice if you think your child has scabies. It’s not usually a serious condition, but it does need to be treated. Your GP will prescribe a lotion or cream.
Find out more about scabies
Scarlet fever
Scarlet fever is a highly contagious bacterial infection. It usually affects children between 2 and 8.
Scarlet fever causes a distinctive rough pink and red rash.
Symptoms and treatments for scarlet fever
Symptoms
Scarlet fever causes a distinctive pink-red rash. This feels like sandpaper to touch and may be itchy.
Scarlet fever often starts with a sore throat,
fever
and
headache
. The rash then develops 2 to 5 days after infection.
The rash usually occurs on the chest and stomach. It then spreads to other areas of the body, like the ears and neck.
Treatments
Speak to your GP if you think your child has scarlet fever.
Antibiotics are used to treat scarlet fever. It usually clears up after about a week.
Find out more about scarlet fever
Slapped cheek syndrome
Slapped cheek syndrome  is a viral infection that’s common in children aged 6 to 10. It’s also known as fifth disease or parvovirus B19.
Slapped cheek syndrome can cause a red rash on one or both cheeks.
Symptoms and treatments for slapped cheek syndrome
Symptoms
Slapped cheek syndrome causes a distinctive bright red rash on both cheeks. This can look alarming, but it usually clears up by itself in 1 to 3 weeks.
Treatments
Unless your child is feeling unwell, they don’t need to stay away from school. Once the rash appears, the infection is no longer contagious. But, it’s a good idea to notify your child’s school about the infection.
Find out more about slapped cheek syndrome
Source:
NHS 24