Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/stomach-liver-and-gastrointestinal-tract/stomach-ache-and-abdominal-pain/

---

Stomach ache and abdominal pain
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Stomach aches are cramps or dull aches in the tummy (abdomen).
Most stomach aches do not usually last long and are often not serious. Severe abdominal pain can be more serious.
Abdominal pain self-help guide
Advice for adults with abdominal pain.
Complete our self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Treatment from a pharmacist
Speak to your pharmacist about:
what’s causing your stomach ache
treatments that might help
medicines to help relieve symptoms of
constipation
and
indigestion
Find your local pharmacy
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you’re less than 16 weeks pregnant and have severe abdominal pain
you have a stomach ache that came on very suddenly or is severe
it hurts when you touch your stomach
you’re vomiting blood or your vomit looks like ground coffee
your poo is bloody or black and sticky and extremely smelly
you can’t pee
you can’t poo or fart
you can’t breathe
you have chest pain
you have diabetes and you’re vomiting
someone has collapsed
Speak to your GP practice if:
your stomach ache gets much worse quickly
stomach pain or bloating will not go away or keeps coming back
you have repeated bouts of stomach cramps and diarrhoea
you have stomach pain and problems with swallowing food
you’re losing weight without trying to
you suddenly pee more often or less often
peeing is suddenly painful
you bleed from your bottom or vagina, or have abnormal discharge from your vagina
you have diarrhoea that does not go away after a few days
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
What causes stomach ache and abdominal pain?
Stomach ache and abdominal pain can have different causes. You may have stomach ache only, or other symptoms like diarrhoea too.
Sudden stomach cramps with diarrhoea
Stomach cramps with
diarrhoea
may be caused by a tummy bug (
gastroenteritis
). Tummy bugs usually get better after a few days and don’t need treatment.
Sudden severe abdominal pain
Sudden severe pain in a particular area of your tummy may be a sign of a serious problem. It could get worse without treatment.
Sudden severe abdominal pain can be caused by:
appendicitis
– painful swelling of the appendix
a bleeding or perforated
stomach ulcer
acute cholecystitis
– inflammation of the gallbladder, which may need to be removed
kidney stones
– small stones that develop in one or both of your kidneys
diverticulitis
– inflammation of the small pouches in the bowel
ectopic pregnancy
– when a fertilised egg develops outside the womb, this can be very serious if it isn’t treated
acute pancreatitis
– a serious condition where the pancreas becomes inflamed over a short period of time
If your GP thinks you have one of these conditions, they’ll ask you to go to hospital immediately.
Sudden and severe pain in your abdomen may also be caused by a pulled muscle in your abdomen or an injury.
If there’s any possibility that you could be pregnant, you should take a pregnancy test.
Long-term or recurring abdominal pain
Speak to your GP practice if you or your child have persistent or repeated abdominal pain. The cause is often not serious and can be managed.
Possible causes in adults include:
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
– the pain is often relieved when you go to the toilet
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
– for example
Crohn’s
d
isease
,
ulcerative colitis
and
endometriosis
a
urinary tract infection (UTI)
that keeps returning – you’ll usually also have a burning sensation when you pee
constipation
period pain
– painful muscle cramps in women that are linked to the menstrual cycle
stomach ulcer
heartburn and acid reflux
gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining)
Possible causes in children include:
constipation
a
UTI
that keeps returning
heartburn
acid reflux
abdominal migraines – abdominal pain that keeps coming back and you don’t know why
Source:
NHS 24