Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/streptococcus-a-strep-a/

---

Group A Streptococcus (GAS), also known as Strep A, are bacteria commonly found on the skin or in the throat. Under some circumstances these bacteria can cause disease.
GAS infection commonly presents as a mild sore throat (‘strep throat’) and skin/soft tissue infections such as impetigo and cellulitis.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
you or your child is having difficulty breathing (you may notice grunting noises or their tummy sucking under their ribs)
there are pauses when you or your child breathes
you or your child’s skin, tongue or lips are blue
you or your child is floppy and will not wake up or stay awake
your child is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 38°C (101°F) or above and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
your child is less than 3 months old and has a temperature of 36°C (97°F) or less and has not had a vaccination in the past 2 days
Contact your GP if you or your child:
is getting worse
is feeding or eating much less than normal
is showing signs of dehydration, like sunken eyes, drowsiness
has not passed urine for 12 hours
is older than 3 months and has a temperature of 39°C or higher
feels hotter than usual when you touch their back or chest, or feels sweaty
is very tired or irritable
If your GP is closed, phone the 111 service.
If you feel that you or your child is seriously unwell, trust your own judgement and seek medical assistance.
Strep A tests are not available through the NHS in Scotland for self-testing at home. Should you or your child need to be tested for Strep A, your GP or other healthcare professional will advise you.
GAS infections
GAS bacteria can cause a wide variety of skin, soft tissue and respiratory tract infections ranging in severity from mild to life-threatening. These include:
tonsillitis
sore throat
scarlet fever
impetigo
erysipelas (a type of cellulitis)
cellulitis
pneumonia
In rare cases, patients may go on to develop post-streptococcal complications, such as:
rheumatic fever
glomerulonephritis (heart and kidney diseases caused by an immune reaction to the bacteria)​
iGAS infections
GAS can very rarely cause more serious conditions, known as invasive group A Streptococcus (iGAS) infections. These can include:
bacteraemia (an infection of the bloodstream)
septic arthritis
meningitis
necrotising fasciitis (a severe infection involving death of areas of soft tissue below the skin)
Streptococcal
toxic shock syndrome
(rapidly progressive symptoms with low blood pressure and multi-organ failure)
iGAS infections tend to happen in the elderly, the very young, or people with an underlying risk factor with groups considered to be at risk of serious GAS infection being:
people with existing health conditions such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or a weakened immune system
people who have recently had flu or chickenpox
newborn babies
women who are pregnant or have recently given birth
people who are homeless or inject drugs
Treating GAS infections
Most GAS infections are relatively mild illnesses that clear up on their own without the need for antibiotics.
Often symptoms that look like GAS infections, like
sore throats
, are more commonly caused by viruses than GAS bacteria. If you or your child has a runny nose with their sore throat, it’s likely to be a virus infection. Sore throats caused by viruses do not need to be treated with antibiotics unless there are concerns about complications.
More about sore throat symptoms, self-care at home, and what to do if your condition worsens
Your healthcare professional will consider antibiotics if they think:
you or your child need medication to get better or to ease symptoms
you or your child are at risk of serious complications from a GAS infection
you or your child has
scarlet fever
If you or your child is prescribed antibiotics, they could be in liquid or pill form.
It’s not uncommon for someone to have GAS bacteria on their skin or in their throat without being unwell. These people often don’t know they have the bacteria and won’t need antibiotics.
Preventing GAS infection
GAS are spread by close contact between individuals, through respiratory droplets (moisture in your breath) and direct skin contact.
To help reduce the risk of picking up or spreading infections:
Do
wash your hands properly with soap for 20 seconds
use a disposable tissue to catch coughs and sneezes and wash your hands afterwards
keep away from others if you feel unwell
Don’t
do not share contaminated food, utensils, cups and glasses, baths, bed linen or towels
GAS can be a secondary infection, developing in people who are already unwell with illnesses like the flu. You can help protect your child from this risk by making sure they get their free
flu vaccine
this winter.
New evidence
also shows that the nasal spray flu vaccine offered to children may also protect them from GAS infection.
Source:
NHS 24