Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/surviving-suicidal-thoughts/getting-help-with-your-suicidal-thoughts/

---

If you’re experiencing suicidal thoughts or thinking about killing yourself, it’s important to know that you’re not alone. There is practical support and advice available.
Suicidal thoughts can happen to any of us, at any time. Often people start noticing these thoughts after a traumatic or stressful event in their life but sometimes there’s no obvious trigger.
Who you are, what you feel and what has happened or is happening in your life does not change the fact that there’s help available. Whether you’ve just started to notice or have had similar thoughts for a long time you can change things for the better, today.
Call 999 or go to your nearest A&E now if:
someone’s life is at immediate risk, for example by serious injury or overdose.
Find your nearest A&E
Coping right now
focus on getting through today
get yourself to a safe place, like a friend’s house
be around other people
stay away from drugs and alcohol
If you’re feeling overwhelmed or out of control you can try these practical tools from Mind. Find out
what you can do to help yourself cope
and
how you can distract yourself
.
You can also read advice on how to cope with suicidal thoughts from
Rethink Mental Illness
.
Phone a helpline
NHS 24
For everyone – open 24 hours.
Phone:
111
and choose the mental health option
Samaritans
For everyone – open 24 hours.
Phone:
116 123
Childline
For children and young people under 19 – open 24 hours.
Phone:
0800 1111
Breathing Space
For everyone – open Monday to Thursday 6pm to 2am and Friday 6pm to Monday 6am at weekends.
Phone:
0800 83 85 87
Campaign Against Living Miserably (CALM)
For men – open 5pm to midnight every day
Phone:
0800 58 58 58
Switchboard LGBT+
For anyone who identifies as LGBT+ – open 10am to 10pm every day
Phone:
0300 330 0630
Message a webchat
Samaritans
For everyone – open 24 hours
Webchat:
samaritans.org/how-we-can-help/contact-samaritan/chat-online/
Childline
For children and young people under 19 – open 24 hours
Webchat:
childline.org.uk/get-support/1-2-1-counsellor-chat/
Campaign Against Living Miserably (CALM)
For men – open 5pm to midnight every day
Webchat:
thecalmzone.net/help/webchat/
Switchboard LGBT+
For anyone who identifies as LGBT+ – open 10am to 10pm every day
Webchat:
switchboard.lgbt
Finding local support
Suicide Prevention Scotland
Suicide Prevention Scotland have
a directory of local support services
you can access near you, when you feel ready.
Coping with suicidal thoughts
This video requires YouTube cookies.
Update your consent
.
How to tell someone you’re feeling suicidal
Telling someone you’re feeling suicidal might feel scary but sharing how you’re feeling is a positive step towards getting help. There’s no right or wrong way to talk about suicidal feelings – starting the conversation is what’s important.
CALM has some suggestions of how you can start a conversation
about suicidal thoughts.
Let family or friends know how you’re feeling. You might prefer to tell a health professional or a teacher if you’re at school. You might want to ask them to help you reach out for help from your GP or a
helpline
.
Mind has more suggestions of how you can open up
to friends and family.
Making a safety plan
If you struggle with suicidal thoughts or are supporting someone else, it may help to make a safety plan to use if you need it.
The
Staying Safe website
provides information on how to make a safety plan, including video tutorials and online templates to guide you through the process.
You can also get information on
planning for a mental health crisis from Mind
Other languages and accessible formats
Easy Read
Get help with your suicidal thoughts – Easy Read
British Sign Language (BSL)
Get help with your suicidal thoughts – BSL
Bengali
Get help with your suicidal thoughts – Bengali
Chinese (simplified)
Get help with your suicidal thoughts – Chinese (simplified)
Polish
Get help with your suicidal thoughts – Polish
NHS inform
About NHS inform
Editorial policy
Contact us
Webchat
Give feedback about NHS inform
Info for Me tool
Terms and conditions
Privacy and cookies policy
Freedom of information (FOI)
Accessibility
Other languages and formats
© 2025 NHS 24 – v1.1.1.17852