Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/sunbed-and-tanning-safety/

---

Sunbed and tanning safety
Sunbeds are often used for tanning. They work by blasting your skin with ultraviolet (UV) rays. The rays penetrate your skin and can cause the same or stronger reaction as exposure to the sun.
The reaction you have will depend on your skin type and can include sunburn or tanning.
There’s no safe or healthy way to get a tan through exposure to UV rays.
In Scotland, it’s illegal to allow anyone under the age of 18 to use a sunbed or other indoor tanning devices.
If you do use sunbeds, it’s important to be aware of the risks and make sure you take safety precautions. This will help to limit any damage.
Risks of using sunbeds
Using sunbeds can increase the risk of skin cancer. Exposure to UV rays is the
number one cause of skin cancer in the UK
. This includes
melanoma
which is the most dangerous type of skin cancer.
Using a sunbed just once before the age of 35 can significantly
increase your risk of melanoma
.
Other risks associated with using sunbeds include:
eye damage
–
using sunbeds without proper eye protection can damage your eyes
premature aging – sunbeds can cause premature wrinkles and sun spots
sunburn
–
sunbeds can cause painful and dangerous sunburn on the face and body
a weakened immune system – UV rays can reduce the body’s immune response which can increase the risk of infections
Sunbed safety advice
If you use sunbeds, you should follow advice to help you stay as safe as possible.
Do
know your skin type
limit any time on sunbeds
read all safety information available
ask staff for advice on how to use sunbeds for your skin type
wear UV blocking eyewear
check your skin regularly for any changes
moisturise your skin after using a sunbed
Don’t
do not use a sunbed if you have a history of skin cancer
do not use a sunbed if you have fair or sensitive skin
do not have repeated sessions to build up a quick tan before a summer holiday
do not use sunbeds as a way to boost your vitamin D – the safest way to get
vitamin D
is through a healthy diet or supplement
Further information on skin types and skin cancer risk
What to do if you get sunburn after using a sunbed
You can get sunburn immediately after a sunbed session or a few hours later.
If you have mild sunburn, take a cool bath or shower. If the sunburn is more severe, you should get advice from a healthcare professional.
Find out more about treating sunburn
Speak to your GP practice or phone 111 if you:
You use sunbeds and have:
severe burning or blisters
any skin damage
unusual changes to your skin – including any new moles or changes to an existing mole
Tanning without UV exposure
Fake tan can come in lotions, sprays and mousses. This is a way to get a tanned effect without being exposed to UV rays. These types of fake tan suit most skin types and can be a safer alternative to sunbeds.
Melanotan II
Melanotan II products may cause the skin to tan when exposed to UV rays. These UV rays could come from natural sunlight or sunbeds.
Melanotan II products may be available in different forms. This includes nasal sprays and tanning injections. These products are unauthorised in the UK and have not been tested. The contents are unknown.
You’re advised not to use either nasal sprays or injections for tanning.
If you use Melanotan II, or any other nasal or injection tanning products, you should stop using them immediately.
If you experience any side effects, speak to your doctor as soon as possible.
Side effects of Melanotan II
The possible side effects of using Melanotan II include:
nausea
drowsiness
vomiting
loss of appetite
Some people may have more severe reactions and the long-term effects of using Melanotan II are still unknown. Using Melanotan II could lead to serious health problems in some cases.
Tanning injections also come with the same risks as other forms of injections. This includes:
hepatitis B
hepatitis C
HIV/AIDS
nerve damage
septicaemia (blood infection)
How to report side effects of Melanotan II
Speak to your doctor if you have any side effects from Melanotan II or other similar tanning products.
You should also report any side effects to:
the Yellow Card Scheme
–
for injectable products only
your local Trading Standards office
–
for nasal sprays only
Source:
Scottish Government