Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/glands/swollen-glands/

---

Swollen glands
Swollen lymph glands are usually a sign of infection. Swollen lymph glands that are caused by an infection usually get better by themselves in 1 to 2 weeks.
Sometimes swollen lymph glands can have a more serious cause and may need to be seen by a doctor.
Phone 111 or ask for an urgent GP appointment if:
You have swollen glands and you:
are finding it very difficult to swallow
have difficulty breathing
Speak to your GP practice if:
You have swollen glands and:
they’re getting bigger
they’ve not gone down within 1 week
they feel hard or do not move when you press them
you’re having night sweats or have a very high temperature (you feel hot and shivery)
you have no other signs of illness or infection
you have swollen lymph glands just above or below your collar bone (the bone that runs from your breastbone to each of your shoulders)
What are the lymph glands?
The lymph glands (or lymph nodes) are small lumps of tissue that contain white blood cells. These help to fight bacteria, viruses and anything else that causes infection. They’re an important part of the immune system and are found throughout the body.
What swollen lymph glands feel like
The lymph glands can swell to more than a few centimetres in response to infection or disease.
Swollen glands feel like tender, painful lumps. You may feel them:
on each side of the neck
under the chin
in the armpits
around the groin
Common causes of swollen glands
Swollen glands are usually caused by a viral or bacterial infection like:
a cold
tonsillitis
glandular fever
a throat infection
an ear infection
a dental abscess
cellulitis (a skin infection)
The glands in the affected area will often become suddenly tender or painful. You may also have other symptoms like a
sore throat
,
cough
, or
fever
.
These infections usually clear up on their own and the swollen glands will soon go down.
Swollen lymph glands are rarely caused by anything more serious.
Managing swollen glands at home
When an infection causes swollen glands you can help to ease symptoms at home.
Do
drink plenty of fluids
rest
use over-the-counter medicines like paracetamol or ibuprofen
Source:
NHS 24