Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/sexual-and-reproductive/testicular-lumps-and-swellings/

---

Testicular lumps and swellings
Lumps and swellings in the testicles (balls) are relatively common in boys, men and anyone with testicles.
It’s important to know what’s normal for you so you can notice any changes in your testicles.
When to get medical advice
Go to A&E immediately or phone 999 if you have any of these symptoms:
• sudden, severe pain in a testicle
• testicle pain along with feeling sick, being sick or pain in your tummy
• testicle pain that has lasted more than an hour or continues when you’re resting
These can be signs of a serious problem that needs to be treated in hospital as soon as possible.
Find your nearest A&E
Speak to your GP practice if you have:
a lump in your testicles
swollen testicles
a change in the shape of your testicles
a change in the way your testicles feel
1 testicle that has become bigger than the other
aching or discomfort in your testicles that does not go away
Diagnosing testicular lumps and swellings
There is not a singular test for testicular lumps and swellings. The doctor will discuss your situation and carry out a physical examination.
Your doctor may:
look at and feel your testicles
shine a torch through the bag of skin containing your testicles (scrotum) to check for a build-up of fluid
refer you for an
ultrasound scan
take a urine (pee) sample if they suspect your lump or swelling may be caused by an infection
If the lump or swelling is painful or very big, your doctor may refer you to a specialist for an operation to drain, shrink or remove it.
What causes testicular lumps and swellings?
Lumps and swellings in the testicles can have lots of different causes.
The vast majority of testicular lumps and swellings are caused by non-cancerous (benign) conditions. Most of these may not need treatment.
If you experience testicular lumps and swellings, they may be caused by:
varicoceles – soft lumps that develop gradually above the testicle and on the left side of the scrotum
hydroceles – swellings in the scrotum caused by a build-up of fluid
epididymal cysts – a small, smooth fluid-filled swelling that slowly develops in the epididymis (a coil-like structure behind the testicles that helps to store and transport sperm)
epididymo-orchitis – inflammation in the epididymis and the testicle caused by bacterial infections such as
urinary tract infections (UTIs)
, sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and
mumps
inguinal hernias – when fatty tissue or part of the bowel pokes through into the groin at the top of the inner thigh
testicular torsion– a benign but serious condition caused by the spermatic cord (the cord that supplies blood to the testicles) becoming severely twisted
testicular cancer
– a more serious health condition
Treatment for testicular lumps and swellings
Treatment for testicular lumps and swellings will vary depending on what’s causing it.
Painkillers such as
paracetamol
can be taken to ease discomfort or pain.
In some cases, surgery may be used to treat some testicular lumps and swellings. The surgery is carried out under either
local anaesthetic
or
general anaesthetic
depending on the procedure.
Antibiotics
may be prescribed if the cause is a bacterial infection.
If you have been diagnosed with
testicular cancer
, you will be cared for by a team of clinicians who will help decide the best treatment for you. Surgery to remove the affected testicle will be recommended in most cases and this may sometimes be followed by a course of
chemotherapy
or
radiotherapy
.
Source:
Scottish Government