Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/stomach-liver-and-gastrointestinal-tract/threadworms/

---

Threadworms
Threadworms (pinworms) are tiny worms in your poo. They’re common in children and are spread easily. You can treat them without seeing a GP.
Symptoms of threadworms
You may spot threadworms in your poo. The worms look like threads of white cotton and are about 1cm long.
You might also see them around your child’s bottom (anus). The worms usually come out at night while your child is sleeping.
Other symptoms include:
extreme itching around the anus or vagina, particularly at night
irritability and wakening up during the night
Less common symptoms include:
weight loss
wetting the bed
irritated skin around the anus
When to get medical advice
If you or your child have threadworms you can get advice and treatment directly from a pharmacy.
Your pharmacist may recommend that you speak to your GP if required.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Treatment for threadworms
Medication will kill the threadworms but not the eggs. Eggs can live for up to 2 weeks outside the body.
There are hygiene methods you can follow to stop becoming infected again. Do these for 2 weeks if you’re taking medicine, or for 6 weeks if you’re not taking medicine.
Things you can do
Do
wash hands and scrub under fingernails – particularly before eating, after using the toilet or after changing nappies
encourage children to wash their hands regularly
shower every morning
rinse toothbrushes before using them
keep fingernails short
wash sleepwear, sheets, towels and soft toys (at a hot temperature) every day for several days after treatment
disinfect kitchen and bathroom surfaces, using hot water
vacuum and dust with a damp cloth
make sure everyone in the household wears underwear at night and changes it in the morning
Don’t
do not shake clothing or bedding, to prevent eggs from landing on other surfaces
do not share towels or flannels
do not bite nails or suck thumbs and fingers
Treatment from a pharmacist
Mebendazole is the main medication used to treat threadworm infection. It can be bought over the counter from your local
pharmacy
or prescribed by your
GP
. This is usually a chewable tablet or liquid you swallow.
Treat everyone over 2 years old in your household, even if they do not have symptoms.
Tell the pharmacist if you need to treat a child under 2 years old, or if you’re pregnant or breastfeeding. Treatment might not be suitable and you may need to speak to a GP.
If you cannot take medicine you can treat threadworms by using hygiene methods for 6 weeks.
Who’s most at risk?
Threadworm infection most commonly affects young children because they often forget to wash their hands and share toys with other children.
People who are in close contact with someone with a threadworm infection also have a high risk of infection. This is why all members of a household need to be treated when someone has a threadworm infection.
How are threadworms passed on?
Threadworms spread when their eggs are swallowed. They lay eggs around your bottom (anus) or vagina, which can cause an
itchy bottom
. The eggs get stuck on your fingers when you scratch. They can then pass on to anything you touch, including:
clothes
toys
toothbrushes
kitchen or bathroom surfaces
bedding
food
Eggs can pass to other people when they touch these surfaces and then touch their mouth. The eggs can survive up to 2 weeks. The larvae hatch from the eggs in your gut after you swallow them, and take 1 to 2 months to mature into threadworms.
Children can get threadworms again after they’ve been treated for them if they get the eggs in their mouth. This is why it’s important to encourage children to wash their hands regularly.
Source:
NHS 24