Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/sexual-and-reproductive/thrush/

---

Thrush
British Sign Language (BSL)
|
简体中文
|
Polski
|
Română
|
slovenčina
Thrush is a very common yeast infection. It’s not a sexually transmitted infection (STI).
It’s usually harmless but it can be uncomfortable and keep coming back.
What is vaginal yeast infection? NHS doctor explains thrush symptoms, treatment and prevention
This video requires Marketing cookies.
Update your consent
.
Symptoms of thrush
Some people won’t have any signs or symptoms of thrush at all.
Sometimes there can be too much yeast and it can cause symptoms.
Thrush symptoms in women
Symptoms of thrush in women include:
white
vaginal discharge
(often like cottage cheese), which does not usually smell
itching and irritation around the vagina
soreness and stinging during sex or when you pee
Thrush symptoms in men
Symptoms of thrush in men include:
irritation, burning and redness around the head of the penis and under the foreskin
a white discharge (like cottage cheese)
an unpleasant smell
difficulty pulling back the foreskin
Thrush in other areas
Thrush can affect other areas of skin, including the armpits, groin and between your fingers.
Symptoms of thrush in other areas include:
a red itchy or painful rash (the rash might not be easy to see on darker skin)
white or yellow discharge
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice or local sexual health clinic if:
you have symptoms of thrush for the first time
you have thrush and are under 16 or over 60
thrush keeps coming back (more than 4 times in 12 months)
treatment for thrush has not worked
you have thrush and are pregnant or breastfeeding
you have thrush and a weakened immune system – for example, because of
diabetes
,
HIV
or
chemotherapy
Testing for thrush
If you think you might have thrush, get tested for free by:
contacting your GP practice for an appointment
booking an appointment at your local sexual health service
Testing is also available in some
pharmacies
.
What does a thrush test involve?
The test for thrush only takes a few seconds and isn’t usually painful, though it may be uncomfortable for a moment.
It’s not always necessary to have a test for thrush. If you do have a test, a doctor or nurse may:
look at the genital area
use a swab (cotton bud) to collect a sample from the parts of the body that could be affected such as the vagina
Thrush may have similar symptoms to some
STIs
, so it’s important you seek advice if you think you may be at risk of an STI.
Treatment for thrush
Thrush treatment options: creams, pills and pessaries. NHS consultant explains
This video requires Marketing cookies.
Update your consent
.
Treatment is simple and only necessary if you have signs and symptoms of thrush.
You may be given:
antifungal cream to apply to the genital area
vaginal pessaries (tablets that you put into your vagina)
oral pills
a combination of treatments
Your doctor or nurse will tell you how to use the treatment.
It’s very important to take the treatment as instructed and finish any course of treatment even if the symptoms go away earlier.
You can buy antifungal treatments from most
pharmacies
if you’ve been diagnosed with thrush in the past and you know the symptoms.
Some antifungal products can weaken latex
condoms
,
diaphragms
and
caps
. You should avoid sex while undergoing treatment if this is your method of contraception.
You should tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you’re pregnant, might be pregnant, or if you’re breastfeeding. This may affect the type of treatment you’re given.
If thrush isn’t treated it eventually goes away on its own.
There’s no need for your partner(s) to have treatment unless they have signs and symptoms of thrush.
What causes thrush?
Your chances of developing thrush increase if:
your skin is irritated or damaged
you’re taking
antibiotics
you have poorly controlled
diabetes
you have a weakened immune system – for example you’re having
chemotherapy
or living with
HIV
you’re having
hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
you’re pregnant
you use products that irritate the skin such as perfumed products, bubble baths or vaginal washing products
How to prevent thrush
Some people find that different triggers cause thrush. If you notice a pattern, you may be able to help control it.
There are things you can do to relieve symptoms and stop thrush from coming back.
Do
use a soap substitute (emollient) to add moisture instead of soap – these are available in some pharmacies
use non-soap bath additives such as unfragranced bath oil instead of bubble bath
dry properly after washing
wear cotton underwear
avoid sex until thrush has cleared up if sex is uncomfortable
if you do have sex, make sure your vagina is well-lubricated
Don’t
do not use soaps on or near your genital area, it can be drying
do not let products like shampoo or conditioner run onto your genital area
do not use bubble baths, essential oils or soap or shower gels in the bath as they’ll run onto the genital skin and cause irritation
do not use wet wipes on the genital skin
do not use feminine washing products – even if they say they are pH balanced as they disrupt healthy bacteria in the vagina
do not ‘douche’ (wash out the vagina with water or other products) as it damages the healthy vaginal organisms and changes their natural balance
do not wear tight underwear, tights, tight trousers or jeans
do not use fabric softeners
If you’re prescribed an antibiotic for another condition, remind your doctor that you tend to get thrush and ask for some preventive treatment for thrush at the same time.
Regular thrush
Some people may only get thrush once. Others may get it multiple times.
You may need to take treatment for longer if you keep getting thrush (you get it more than 4 times in 12 months).
If you get recurrent thrush the doctor or nurse will want to check that other conditions, such as diabetes, aren’t the cause of the thrush.
They’ll recommend how often you should use treatment.
Find your local sexual health clinic
Source:
Scottish Government