Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/injuries/skin-injuries/tick-bites/

---

Tick bites
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Ticks are small, spider-like creatures. They feed on the blood of birds and mammals, including humans.
Ticks vary in size and are usually between 1mm to 1cm long. They have either 6 or 8 legs.
Symptoms of tick bites
Tick bites aren’t usually painful but they may cause a red lump to develop where you were bitten.
In some cases, tick bites may cause:
swelling
itchiness
blistering
bruising
Speak to your GP practice:
If you’ve been in an area where you could have been bitten by a tick and you have:
a pink or red rash
a temperature of 38°C (100.4°F) or above
other flu-like symptoms, like a headache or joint pain
swollen lymph nodes
Tick bites self-help guide
Complete this self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
How to remove a tick
To remove a tick, you should:
Use a tick removal device or fine-toothed tweezers to gently grip the tick as close to the skin as possible.
Pull steadily away from the skin without crushing the tick.
Wash your skin with water and soap afterwards.
Apply an antiseptic cream to the skin around the bite.
Many pharmacies and outdoor stores sell tick removal devices. These are useful if you often spend time in areas where there are ticks.
If the tick’s mouthparts break off in the skin and can’t be removed, this may cause irritation but they they should fall out naturally in time.
Do not use a cigarette end, match head, alcohol or petroleum jelly on a tick.
Once you’ve removed a tick, monitor the area where you were bitten. You do not need to speak to your GP if you’ve been bitten and have no symptoms.
Watch more videos on tick bites
How to remove a tick from your clothing
You should remove any ticks from yourself or your clothing before washing.
You can use tweezers to remove a tick from your clothing or any other fabric (like a carpet or bedding). You could then tightly wrap the tick in tape and put it in an outside bin.
You don’t need to disinfect clothing that has a tick on it.
How to prevent tick bites
There are some steps you can take to help prevent tick bites.
Do
stay on paths and avoid long grass when walking outdoors
wear a long-sleeved shirt and trousers tucked into your socks when walking outdoors
wear light-coloured fabrics for walking – this may help you to spot a tick on your clothing
use insect repellent on exposed skin
check your skin and clothing for ticks after being outdoors
check your children’s skin for ticks – especially the head and neck areas, including their scalp
check that pets do not bring ticks into your home in their fur
Complications of tick bites
If you have a tick bite, you should remove the tick as soon as possible. This helps to reduce the risk of getting a tick-borne infection like
Lyme disease
.
Lyme disease is a bacterial infection that causes a pink or red circular rash to develop around the area of the bite.
A small number of ticks carry the bacteria that can cause Lyme disease. Being bitten doesn’t mean you’ll definitely be infected. But, it’s important to be aware of the risk and speak to a GP if you start to feel unwell.
Find out more about Lyme disease
Lyme disease can cause a pink or red circular rash to develop around the area of the bite.
Where are ticks found?
Ticks feed from a variety of mammals and birds, including squirrels, deer, sheep and garden birds. This means they’re usually found in areas with these animals, like:
woodland
moorland
grassy areas
gardens
parks
Ticks don’t fly or jump but climb on to animals or humans as they brush past.
When is tick season?
Tick season is usually between March and October but it may last longer. This is because wet weather and warmer temperatures make ticks active for longer in the year.
You should be aware of ticks all year round. This is because some symptoms of a tick bite, including inflammation, can take 2 to 3 months to develop.
Source:
NHS 24