Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/tinnitus/

---

Tinnitus
Tinnitus is the name for hearing sounds that come from inside your body rather than an outside source.
It’s not usually a sign of anything serious and may get better by itself.
Symptoms of tinnitus
Tinnitus is often called ‘ringing in the ears’ but it’s not just ringing. You might hear:
buzzing
humming
grinding
hissing
whistling
music or singing
noises that beat in time with your pulse
You may also notice hearing loss or that you’re more sensitive to everyday sounds.
For some people, tinnitus may come and go. But sometimes it can impact your daily life and be very distressing. It can affect concentration and cause difficulty sleeping
(insomnia)
and
depression
.
Tinnitus will sometimes get better over time, either by disappearing or by the body getting used to it.
What does tinnitus sound like?
This video requires Marketing cookies.
Update your consent
.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
you continually or regularly hear sounds such as buzzing, ringing or humming in your ears
your tinnitus is getting worse
your tinnitus is bothering you – for example, it’s affecting your sleep or concentration, or is making you feel anxious and depressed
you have tinnitus that beats in time with your pulse
Diagnosing tinnitus
Your doctor can examine your ears to see if the problem might be caused by a condition they could easily treat, such as an
ear infection
or
earwax build-up
. They can also check if you have any
hearing loss
.
If needed, your GP can refer you to a specialist for further tests and treatment.
What causes tinnitus?
Tinnitus can develop slowly over time or happen suddenly.
It’s not known exactly why it happens but it’s often linked to:
hearing loss
inner ear damage caused by repeated exposure to loud noises or some medicines
an
earwax build-up
a
middle ear infection
Ménière’s disease
– a condition that also causes hearing loss and
vertigo
(a spinning sensation)
otosclerosis – an inherited condition where an abnormal bone growth in the middle ear causes hearing loss
Who is affected?
Most people have tinnitus for a short time after being exposed to loud noises, such as after a music concert.
Around 1 in 10 people have persistent tinnitus. Around 1 in 100 having severe tinnitus that affects their daily life.
Tinnitus can affect people of all ages, including children. It’s more common in people aged over 65.
How is tinnitus treated
There’s currently no treatment for tinnitus that works for everyone.
If your tinnitus is caused by an underlying condition, then treating that condition may help your tinnitus.
If a cause can’t be found, treatment will focus on helping you manage the condition on a daily basis. This may involve:
sound therapy – listening to neutral sounds to distract you from the sound of tinnitus
counselling – to teach you about tinnitus and help you learn to cope with it better
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) – to help change the way you think about your tinnitus so it becomes less noticeable
tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) – to help you start to tune tinnitus out and become less aware of it
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Do
try to relax – deep breathing or yoga may help
try to find ways to improve your sleep, such as sticking to a bedtime routine or cutting down on caffeine
try to avoid things that can make tinnitus worse, such as stress or loud background noises
join a support group – talking to other people with tinnitus may help you cope
Don’t
do not have total silence – listening to soft music or sounds (sound therapy) may distract you from the tinnitus
do not focus on it, as this can make it worse – hobbies and activities may take your mind off it
Source:
ENT Scotland