Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/children-and-young-peoples-muscles-bones-and-joints/toe-walking-in-children-and-young-people/

---

Toe walking in children and young people
Toe walking is walking on tip toes, or without the heel coming into contact with the ground. It can happen some, most or all of the time.
What causes toe walking?
Toe walking in children is a normal part of development and many children will grow out of this.
Most children grow out of it between 2 and 7 years old. In some cases toe walking can continue into adulthood.
If there is no medical condition or other clear cause of toe walking, this is known as idiopathic toe walking.
In a very small number of children, toe walking might be due to one of a number of other conditions that may require further investigation.
These can include:
neurological – like
cerebral palsy
neuromuscular – like
muscular dystrophy
neurodivergent – like
autistic spectrum disorders (ASD)
Is idiopathic toe walking harmful?
Idiopathic toe walking generally doesn’t cause any harm to children. It doesn’t usually cause pain or deformities and can often simply be a habit.
Frequent toe walking can be associated with tight calves, this is the muscle that runs from the back of the knee to your heel.
Tight calves can make it more difficult to walk with their heels down and can occasionally cause some discomfort.
What can I do to help my child?
It can be helpful to try these exercises to help increase the flexibility in your child’s calves.
encourage your child to stand with their heels down to play (e.g. at a table or couch)
older children may also respond to being told to walk with their heels down and their feet flat
play based activities to encourage walking on heels, like walking carefully on a line (like a tightrope) and playing or walking in both a squat or ‘bear crawl’ position
encourage your child to regularly wear supportive, sturdy footwear like boots or trainers
Daily stretches can help prevent tight calf muscles. Do either of the following twice a day, holding for 30 seconds each time
assisted stretch for young children
wall stretch for children able to follow instructions
You can gradually reduce how much they do these activities as things improve but if your child begins to show signs of toe walking again then keeping them as part of your child’s routine may be helpful.
If none of these have improved your child’s toe walking after 6 months, you should speak to a healthcare professional.
How is toe walking managed?
Assessment will involve looking at your child’s walking and motor skills, as well as looking at the strength and flexibility of the muscles in their legs.
If treatment is required it may involve:
exercises and stretches
serial casting – casts put on to the child’s legs to stretch the calves
splinting – like casts but removable and worn over a longer term to maintain the ankle position
There will be some children who will continue to toe walk even after a period of treatment and whilst this can be frustrating, it’s usually nothing to worry about.
Some children may show signs of toe walking again after a growth spurt, if this happens you should restart or increase the stretching and exercises until it improves.
Children with conditions such as autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) may need to continue with home stretching and activities over a longer period of time but there is still no guarantee that this will stop their toe walking.
When should you speak to a healthcare professional?
Seek advice from a healthcare professional if:
toe walking is only on one side, or is more obvious on one side
your child has suddenly started toe walking after previously walking with their heels down
your child is unable to put their heels flat on the ground while standing
your child’s legs feel stiff or any of their other movements look awkward
toe walking is causing problems with your child’s balance or daily activities
your child has any pain or discomfort in their calves
If your child has a known condition (neurological, neuromuscular or neurodivergent) and you’re concerned about their toe walking you should contact your healthcare professional.
If a healthcare professional does an assessment and feels your child needs further treatment they may be referred to paediatric physiotherapy or paediatric orthopaedics.
Source:
NHS 24 CYP MSK Expert Panel