Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/tonsillitis/

---

Tonsillitis
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Tonsillitis is an infection that causes inflammation (redness and swelling) of the tonsils.
Tonsillitis is a common condition in children, teenagers and young adults.
What are the tonsils?
The tonsils are 2 small glands that sit on either side of the throat. In young children, they help to fight germs and act as a barrier against infection.
When the tonsils become infected, they stop it spreading further into the body.
As a child’s immune system gets stronger, the tonsils become less important and usually get smaller. In most people, the body is able to fight infection without the tonsils.
Sore throat self-help guide
Advice for people aged 3 years or more with the symptoms of a sore throat.
Complete our self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Symptoms of tonsillitis
The symptoms of tonsillitis include:
a
sore throat
pain when swallowing
earache
high temperature (fever) over 38°C (100.4°F)
coughing
headache
feeling sick
feeling tired
swollen, painful lymph glands in your neck
white pus-filled spots on the tonsils
bad breath
loss of voice or changes to your voice
Symptoms usually get better within 3 to 4 days.
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
symptoms last longer than 4 days and don’t show any signs of getting better
symptoms are severe – for example, if you’re unable to eat or drink due to the pain, or you have difficulty breathing
you keep getting throat infections
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Diagnosing tonsillitis
If needed, your GP will examine your throat and ask you some questions about your symptoms. They may take a swab of your throat to check if its caused by a viral or bacterial infection. It’ll usually take a few days to get your results.
If you develop severe tonsillitis as a teenager or adult, your GP may recommend a
blood test
for
glandular fever.
Treating tonsillitis
There’s no specific treatment for tonsillitis. It usually gets better on its own within a week.
Things you can do to help your symptoms
Do
take
paracetamol
or
ibuprofen
to help relieve pain
drink plenty of fluids
get plenty of rest
Always read the leaflet that comes with your medicine before taking it. Follow the recommended dosage instructions. If you’re not sure which treatments are suitable for you or your child,
speak to a pharmacist
for advice.
Treatments from your doctor
If test results show that your tonsillitis is caused by a bacterial infection, a short course of oral
antibiotics
may be prescribed.
If oral antibiotics do not help and your symptoms are getting worse, your GP may refer you to hospital for antibiotics to be given into a vein (IV antibiotics).
Surgery to remove the tonsils (tonsillectomy)
A small number of children and adults have tonsillitis for longer, or it keeps returning. This is called chronic tonsillitis and surgery may be needed.
Surgery to remove the tonsils (a tonsillectomy) is usually only recommended if:
you’ve had several severe episodes of tonsillitis over a long period of time
repeated episodes are disrupting normal activities
What causes tonsillitis?
Most cases of tonsillitis are caused by a viral infection, such as
cold
or
flu
.
Some cases can also be caused by a bacterial infection, typically a strain of bacteria called
group A streptococcus
bacteria.
Tonsillitis itself isn’t contagious, but the infections that cause it are.
How to prevent infections spreading
Do
wash your hands often, especially after touching your nose or mouth and before handling food
always sneeze and cough into tissues
throw used tissues away and wash your hands
Complications of tonsillitis
Complications of tonsillitis are rare and usually only occur if it’s caused by a bacterial infection. They’re usually the result of the infection spreading to another part of the body.
Possible complications of tonsillitis include:
quinsy (peritonsillar abscess) – an abscess (collection of pus) that develops between one of the tonsils and the wall of the throat
obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)
– where the walls of the throat relax during sleep, which causes breathing difficulties and poor sleep
Other complications of tonsillitis are very rare. They usually only occur if an underlying bacterial infection is left untreated.
Source:
ENT Scotland