Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/sexual-and-reproductive/trichomonas-infection/

---

Trichomonas infection
British Sign Language (BSL)
|
简体中文
|
Polski
|
Română
|
slovenčina
Trichomonas is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a small parasite.
It infects the genitals and may lead to an infection in the urethra (the tube that carries urine out of the body) and the prostate.
Symptoms of trichomonas
Most people with trichomonas infection will have no symptoms but they can still pass the infection on.
If you do develop symptoms you may get:
a yellow or green discharge from the vagina or penis, which can sometimes have an unpleasant smell
genital itching and soreness
pain or a burning sensation when peeing
Some women may get some pain or discomfort during sex.
Testing for trichomonas
If you think you might have trichomonas, get tested for free by:
booking an appointment at your local sexual health service
contacting your GP practice for an appointment
What does a trichomonas test involve?
Testing is quick and straightforward. There are 2 main ways the sample can be collected:
using a swab – a small cotton bud is gently wiped over the area that might be infected, such as inside the vagina or penis
urine sample – this should ideally be done at least 1 or 2 hours after you last peed
Most sexual health clinics can look at the sample straightaway under the microscope and see the parasite. In some clinics and at your GP, the swab needs to be sent away to a lab to make the diagnosis.
The test is more accurate from vagina samples. It’s less accurate from penis and urine samples.
Treating trichomonas
Trichomonas infection is treated with antibiotics.
It’s advised that both you and your partner(s) are treated if you have the infection.
You and your partner(s) may be asked to return to your GP practice or sexual health clinic for another test to check the infection has gone.
You should avoid having sex until 1 week after you and your partner(s) treatment has finished.
If your infection is untreated you may pass it on to other sexual partners.
How trichomonas is passed on
Trichomonas infection is spread through unprotected sex and sharing sex toys.
It’s not passed on through oral or anal sex.
You can’t pass on trichomonas through:
kissing or hugging
sharing cups, plates or cutlery
toilet seats
How to prevent trichomonas
The best way to reduce your risk of STIs is to practice
safer sex
. This means using a condom for vaginal, anal and oral sex.
Other STIs
If you have been diagnosed with trichomonas, you should get tested for all STIs including:
chlamydia
gonorrhoea
syphilis
Find your local sexual health clinic
Source:
Scottish Government