Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/children-and-young-peoples-muscles-bones-and-joints/trigger-thumb-in-children-and-young-people/

---

A trigger thumb or trigger finger occurs when there is a thickening of a tendon that bends the finger or thumb. This means the tendon is not able to slide smoothly within the tunnel that it passes through. This causes your child’s finger or thumb to pop or click when they try to straighten it.
Trigger thumb or finger is rarely noticed at birth. They can be present in infancy. The condition is also often found in older children.
This is not caused by an injury. The thickening of the tendon doesn’t mean your child has an underlying problem or condition.
Although it can affect the child’s ability to straighten their thumb, it is rarely painful. It does not cause any problems with using their hands and usually gets better without treatment.
In children, the most common digit involved is the thumb.
Symptoms of trigger thumb or finger
Some common signs of trigger finger and thumb include:
stiffness in the affected finger or thumb
a finger or thumb that gets stuck in either a bent or straight position
What treatment is needed if my child has trigger thumb or finger?
Trigger thumb or finger in children usually gets better on its own with no treatment. This can take up to 2 years. There is no evidence that splinting, or exercise make any difference. Your child’s hand function won’t be affected while waiting for it to get better.
In a very small number of cases where the trigger thumb or finger doesn’t resolve, surgery can be considered.
Any surgery also comes with additional health risks. It’s not recommended for children under 3 years of age.
When should I speak to a healthcare professional?
Speak to a healthcare professional if:
your child is complaining of significant pain
they are over the age of 3 and it’s restricting their ability to use their hands as normal
Source:
NHS 24 CYP MSK Expert Panel