Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/injuries/skin-injuries/types-of-bites-and-stings/

---

Types of bites and stings
There are many types of insect bites and stings. These have different symptoms.
Bedbug bite
Bites from bedbugs aren’t usually painful but you may get a red lump on the skin. This can be itchy or irritating.
Bedbug bites can be raised and itchy. They’re often in a line or grouped together.
Bee and wasp sting
A bee, wasp or hornet sting causes sharp pain in the area that was stung. This usually only lasts a few seconds.
A swollen red mark will often form on your skin, which can be itchy and painful.
You can remove a sting using your fingers. You can also brush it out using something with a hard edge like a bank card. Do not use tweezers to remove a sting as this could squeeze the venom from it. You should also wash the area with soap and water.
A bee or wasp sting will usually leave a small mark where the stinger entered the skin. Sometimes the stinger may be stuck in your skin.
Flea bite
Flea bites can cause small red spots on the skin. These may be grouped in clusters or lines. Sometimes itchy red lumps can form too.
Flea bites are usually found around the ankles. They can also be on the forearms if you’ve been stroking or holding your pet.
Flea bites can cause small red spots on the skin.
Horsefly bite
A bite from a horsefly can be very painful. It can cause a weal (swollen mark) around the bite.
You may also experience:
hives
dizziness
weakness
wheezing
angioedema
– itchy, pale pink or red swellings
Horsefly bites can take a long time to heal and can cause an infection.
Midge, mosquito and gnat bite
Bites from midges, mosquitoes and gnats cause small papules (lumps) to form on the skin. These are usually very itchy.
If you’re particularly sensitive to insect bites, you may develop:
bullae – fluid-filled blisters
weals – circular, fluid-filled areas surrounding the bite
Mosquito bites in certain areas of tropical countries can cause
malaria
.
The skin may become itchy and raised around the bite or sting. These are symptoms of a mild allergic reaction.
Mite bite
Mites can cause very itchy lumps and blisters on the skin. They will bite any uncovered skin.
Mite bites cause very itchy lumps on the skin and sometimes cause blisters.
Sea creatures
In Scotland, there are some sea creatures that can bite or sting. This includes:
jellyfish
sea urchins
weever fish
Portuguese man-of-war
The main symptoms of sea creature stings are intense pain where you’re stung and an itchy rash.
Jellyfish and Portuguese man-of-war stings can also cause raised stripes on the skin (welts).
Find out more about jellyfish and sea creature stings
Spider bite
It’s rare to get a spider bite in the UK. Spider bites leave small puncture marks on the skin. This can be painful and may cause redness and swelling.
Tick bite
Tick bites aren’t usually painful but you may get a red lump where you were bitten.
In some cases, they may also cause:
swelling
itching
blisters
bruising
Ticks can carry a bacterial infection that causes Lyme disease. Many people with early symptoms of Lyme disease develop a circular rash around the tick bite.
Lyme disease can be serious if it isn’t treated.
Find out more about
tick bites
and
Lyme disease
Sometimes the edges of a tick bite rash may feel slightly raised.
Source:
NHS 24