Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/diabetes/type-1-diabetes/

---

Type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes is a lifelong condition that causes a person’s blood glucose (sugar) level to become too high. This can make you feel unwell in the short term and can, over time, seriously damage your organs.
Type 1 diabetes happens because the pancreas doesn’t produce insulin. Insulin is the hormone responsible for controlling the amount of glucose in your blood.
Read more on the complications of type 1 diabetes
Symptoms of type 1 diabetes
If your blood sugar is too high you may:
feel very
thirsty
pee more often than usual, particularly at night
feel very tired all the time
lose weight and muscle bulk
get persistent infections like
thrush
develop blurred vision caused by the lens of your eye changing shape
The symptoms of type 1 diabetes usually develop very quickly in young people. This is normally over a few hours or days. In adults, the symptoms often take longer to develop, over a few days or weeks.
The symptoms of type 1 diabetes should disappear when you start taking insulin and you bring your blood sugars closer to normal levels.
Read more about hyperglycaemia
What causes type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune condition. Your normal immune system mistakes the cells in your pancreas as harmful. It then attacks them.
Without insulin, your body will break down its own fat and muscle, resulting in weight loss. This can lead to a serious short-term condition called diabetic ketoacidosis.
Insulin is also needed to move glucose out of the blood and into your cells to be used for energy.
Diagnosing type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes is normally diagnosed with urine and blood tests.
Your urine sample will be tested to see whether it contains glucose. If you have diabetes, some glucose can overflow through the kidneys and into the urine. Your urine may also be tested for ketones (the broken down products of fats).
Your healthcare professional may do a finger prick blood test. This will test for for glucose and ketones. A sample will be sent to a laboratory to confirm the diagnosis.
If there’s a concern you have type 1 diabetes, your results will be discussed with the specialist diabetes service.
Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c)
The glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) test is a blood test that can be used to diagnose diabetes. It can also be used to monitor long-term levels of your blood sugar.
The HbA1c test gives your average blood glucose level over the previous 2 to 3 months. The results can show whether the measures you’re taking to manage your diabetes are working.
If you’ve been diagnosed with diabetes, it’s recommended that you have your HbA1c measured at least once a year. However, you may need to have it measured more often if:
you’ve recently been diagnosed with diabetes
your blood glucose remains too high
your treatment plan has been changed
you’re planning a pregnancy
Your target HbA1c will be individual to you, but a target of 53mmol/mol is often recommended. Mmol/mol is a unit of measurement which shows the concentration of glucose in your blood.
People with diabetes using continuous glucose monitoring will have an estimate of their current HbA1c available using the meter readings.
Treatment for type 1 diabetes
It’s important that diabetes is diagnosed as early as possible. If left untreated, type 1 diabetes is a life-threatening condition. It’s essential that treatment is started early.
Type 1 diabetes can’t be cured at the moment. Treatment aims to keep your blood glucose levels as normal as possible. This will help control your symptoms. It’ll also help to prevent health problems developing later in life.
If you’re diagnosed with type 1 diabetes, you’ll be referred to a diabetes care team. That team will provide specialist treatment and monitoring.
You’ll need regular insulin injections or insulin pump to keep your glucose levels normal. You’ll be helped to understand how to do this. You’ll also learn how to match the insulin you inject to the food (carbohydrate) you eat. You’ll also take into account your:
blood glucose level
how much exercise you do
Insulin
Insulin injections come in several different forms. Each one works slightly differently. You’ll most likely need a combination of different insulin preparations.
Insulin is given to some patients by a by an insulin pump. This means you’ll get a programmed flow of insulin. This will either be controlled by you or by glucose monitoring values. Both of these methods replace long-acting insulin injections.
There are alternatives to insulin injections and pumps. They’re only suitable for a very small number of patients. This is because they need very strong drugs to suppress your immune system.
They alternatives to insulin injections and pumps are:
islet cell transplantation – where healthy insulin-producing cells are implanted into the liver of someone with type 1 diabetes
a complete pancreas transplant
Living with type 1 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes is a life-long condition. But, its’ possible to live well with it if you have the right:
support
input
knowledge
If you have type 1 diabetes there are things you’ll need to do. These are:
check your blood glucose levels regularly
take insulin regularly each day
look out for the signs of hypos
attend your check up appointments
There are also things you’ll need to think about like driving and becoming pregnant.
Monitoring blood glucose
An important part of your treatment is to make sure that your blood glucose level is as normal and stable as possible.
It’ll also help to know your blood glucose levels to make sure they’re not too high or too low.
You’ll be able to manage this using insulin treatment and by eating a
healthy, balanced diet
.
Your blood glucose levels can be affected by:
exercise
illness
stress
drinking alcohol
taking other medicines
changes to your hormone levels during your period, if you have periods
Most people with type 1 diabetes do this with a continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) device. This allows you to monitor the levels day and night.
Read more about continuous glucose monitoring on MyDiabetesMyWay
Your care team will advise of the best figures for you. Often people with type 1 diabetes would aim for values on their CGM to be between 3.9 and 10 mmo/l 70% of the time or more
Diabetes UK has more information on
testing your glucose levels
.
Diabetes sick day rules
You should have received instructions about looking after yourself if you’re ill. These are known as your sick day rules
like this example from MyDiabetesMyWay
.
Contact your diabetes team for advice if you’re uncertain of haven’t received these.
Pregnancy with type 1 diabetes
Many women with diabetes will have successful pregnancies. About 1 in 100 women in Scotland have been diagnosed with diabetes before becoming pregnant.
High blood sugars very early in pregnancy can affect your baby’s early development. Care teams will be keen to discuss plans before you become pregnant. They’ll help you achieve a safe blood glucose level for early pregnancy.
They’ll help you keep your blood sugar as normal as possible before and during your pregnancy. They’ll talk to you about whether changes to other treatments are needed. These could be treatments like blood pressure or cholesterol treatments. These often need to be changed or stopped before pregnancy.
Talk to your diabetes team as soon as possible if you find out you’re pregnant.
Your care team will talk to you about the different ways to help you:
monitor your blood glucose
deliver insulin
Read more about diabetes and pregnancy:
Diabetes UK
My Diabetes My Way
JDRF
Diabetes and your child
Any parent whose child is diagnosed with type 1 diabetes may need extra help and support.
Type 1 diabetes involves treatment and monitoring. The aim of this is to help your child have a normal, healthy life.
Diabetes UK has information and advice about
your child and diabetes
.
Driving with type 1 diabetes
You should always tell your insurer that you have type 1 diabetes. Having type 1 diabetes may affect your insurance policy.
You should also refer to
the DVLA guidelines
. But most people with well treated type 1 diabetes should be able to have a Group 1 licence.
It’s important that you check your blood sugar before driving. Diabetes UK have more information about
driving with diabetes
.
Check ups and screening
Check ups and screening are really important ways you can:
stay healthy with type 1 diabetes
find and treat complications of type 1 diabetes early
You’ll have regular check ups with your diabetes team. These may be yearly. You’ll have more check ups in the first year of your diagnosis.
You’ll also be offered:
diabetic eye screening
– this will help detect if you’re starting to develop an eye condition called diabetic retinopathy
foot check ups
– this is to check to make sure your feet are healthy
Help and support
Many people find it helpful to talk to others in a similar position. You may find support from a group for people with diabetes. Patient organisations have local groups where you can meet others who’ve been diagnosed with the condition.
Silvercloud offer courses in
Diabetes UK can help you to
find your local diabetes support group
. To contact a trained counsellor directly:
phone Diabetes UK’s Helpline Scotland on 0345 123 2399
email helpline.scotland@diabetes.org.uk
Further information on Helpline Scotland
Read more on the complications of type 1 diabetes
Source:
Scottish Government