Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/kidneys-bladder-and-prostate/urinary-incontinence/

---

Urinary incontinence
Urinary incontinence is when you pee by accident. It can happen when doing exercise like running, lifting weights at the gym or jumping on a trampoline.
Urinary incontinence can affect anyone. It tends to be more common in women.
Further information about
urinary incontinence in women
Although it’s common, it shouldn’t be thought of as normal. There are things you can do to reduce the chance of this happening and improve your symptoms.
How to prevent urinary incontinence
There are things you can do that may help reduce the chance of urinary incontinence in the future.
Do
strengthen you pelvic floor muscles with simple pelvic floor exercises
stay active
maintain a healthy weight
avoid or cut down on alcohol and caffeinated drinks, such as coffee, tea and some fizzy drinks
Types of urinary incontinence
The 2 most common types of urinary incontinence are:
stress incontinence – pee leaking out when your bladder is under pressure (life when you laugh, cough, sneeze, exercise or lift something heavy)
urge incontinence – feeling a sudden and very intense need to pee and being unable to stop it
Less common types of incontinence are:
mixed incontinence – having both stress and urge incontinence
overflow incontinence (also called chronic urinary retention) – the bladder cannot completely empty
total incontinence – severe and continuous urinary incontinence
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
You have any symptoms of urinary incontinence, such as:
peeing by accident
feeling a sudden need to pee and are unable to stop it
What causes urinary incontinence?
The causes of urinary incontinence depend on the type.
Certain things can increase the chances of urinary incontinence developing, including:
being overweight
a family history of incontinence
getting older – but incontinence doesn’t happen just because you’ve aged
if you’re a woman, pregnancy and vaginal birth
if you’re a man, having surgery to remove the prostate gland
Diagnosing urinary incontinence
Your GP will ask you some questions to understand what may be causing the incontinence and how bad it is.
They may also:
try to rule out other things that could be causing your symptoms, such as a
urinary tract infection
suggest you keep a diary of how much fluid you drink and how often you have to pee
carry out a pelvic examination (in women) or rectal examination (in men) – as this is an intimate examination, there may be another person (chaperone) present
refer you to a specialist, usually a physiotherapist
Treatment for urinary incontinence
Treatments which do not involve taking medication or having surgery are usually tried first. These include:
treating the underlying cause, if urinary incontinence is caused by another condition
lifestyle changes – such as reducing your caffeine intake, changing how much you drink, and maintaining a
healthy weight
pelvic floor muscle training – your healthcare professional will explain how to do these exercises
bladder training – techniques to increase the length of time between feeling the need to go to the toilet and peeing
Incontinence products (like pads or pants) aren’t a treatment for urinary incontinence. But you might find them helpful while you are waiting for assessment or for a treatment to start working.
If these treatments don’t work for you, your doctor may suggest trying other treatments, like medication or surgery. This will depend on the cause and type of incontinence you are experiencing.
It’s ok to ask any questions about your care
to help you get the information you might need.
Source:
Scottish Government