Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/kidneys-bladder-and-prostate/urinary-tract-infection-uti/

---

Urinary tract infection (UTI)
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common infections that affect the bladder, the kidneys and the tubes connected to them. A UTI can be painful and uncomfortable, but usually passes within a few days and can be treated with
antibiotics
.
Anyone can get a UTI, but they’re particularly common in women. Some women experience them regularly (called recurrent UTIs).
This page is about UTIs in adults. There is a separate page about
UTIs in children
.
Urinary infection self-help guide
Advice for people aged 12 years or more with the symptoms of a urine infection.
Complete this self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Symptoms of UTIs
Lower UTIs
Infections of the bladder (cystitis) or urethra (tube that carries urine out of the body) are known as lower UTIs. These can cause:
a need to pee more often than usual
pain or discomfort when peeing
sudden urges to pee
feeling as though you’re unable to empty your bladder fully
pain low down in your tummy
urine that’s cloudy, foul-smelling or contains blood
feeling generally unwell, achy and tired
Lower UTIs are common and aren’t usually a cause for major concern.
You can speak to your pharmacist for advice and treatment on lower UTIs in women.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Speak to your GP for advice and treatment on lower UTIs in men or children. If your GP is closed, phone 111.
Upper UTIs
Infections of the kidneys
or ureters (tubes connecting the kidneys to the bladder) are known as upper UTIs. These can cause the same symptoms as lower UTIs and also:
a high temperature (fever) of 38ºC (100.4ºF) or above
pain in your sides or back
shivering and chills
feeling and being sick
confusion
agitation or restlessness
Upper UTIs can be serious if left untreated, as they could damage the kidneys or spread to the bloodstream.
Speak to your GP urgently if:
You think you, your child or someone you care for may have a UTI and:
have a very high temperature, or feel hot and shivery
have a low temperature below 36°C
are confused or drowsy
have pain in the lower tummy or in the back, just under the ribs
can see blood in your pee
If your GP is closed, phone 111.
These symptoms could mean you have a
kidney infection
, which can be serious if it’s not treated as it could cause
sepsis
.
Speak to your GP if:
you have symptoms of an upper UTI
your child has symptoms of a UTI
the symptoms are severe or getting worse
the symptoms haven’t started to improve after a few days
you get UTIs frequently
your symptoms come back after treatment
Your GP team can:
rule out other possible causes of your symptoms by testing a sample of your urine
prescribe antibiotics if you have an infection
Chronic UTIs
In some people UTI symptoms do not go away. Short-term antibiotics do not work and urine tests do not show an infection.
This might mean you have a chronic (long-term) UTI. This can be caused by bacteria entering the lining of the bladder.
Because urine tests do not always pick up the infection and the symptoms can be similar to other conditions, chronic UTIs can be hard to diagnose.
Chronic UTIs might be treated with antibiotics that you take for a long time.
Chronic UTIs can have a big impact on your quality of life. If you have been treated for a UTI but you still have symptoms, speak to your GP about chronic UTIs and ask to be referred to a specialist.
Treatment for UTIs
UTIs are normally treated with a short term course of
antibiotics
.
Most women are given a 3-day course of antibiotic capsules or tablets. Men, pregnant women and people with more serious symptoms may need a slightly longer course.
Your symptoms will normally pass within 3 to 5 days of starting treatment. Make sure you complete the whole course of antibiotics that you’ve been prescribed, even if you’re feeling better.
Over-the-counter pain relief such as
paracetamol
can help with any pain. Drinking plenty of fluids may also help you feel better.
Return to your GP if your symptoms don’t improve, get worse, or come back after treatment.
What causes a UTI?
UTIs occur when the urinary tract becomes infected, usually by bacteria. In most cases, bacteria from the gut enter the urinary tract through the urethra.
This may happen when wiping your bottom or having sex. But often it’s not clear why it happens.
The following may increase your risk of getting a UTI:
conditions that obstruct your urinary tract, such as
kidney stones
difficulty emptying your bladder fully
using a
contraceptive diaphragm
or
condoms
coated in spermicide
diabetes
a weak immune system – for example from
chemotherapy
or
HIV
a urinary catheter (a tube in your bladder used to drain urine)
an
enlarged prostate gland
in men
Women may be more likely to get UTIs because their urethra is shorter than a man’s and is closer to their anus (back passage).
How to prevent a UTI
There are some things you can do to try to prevent UTIs.
Do
go to the toilet as soon as you need to pee
always empty your bladder fully
stay well hydrated
wipe your bottom from front to back when you go to the toilet
pee as soon as possible after having sex
have a shower rather than a bath
wear underwear made from cotton, rather than synthetic material such as nylon
avoid tight jeans and trousers
Don’t
do not use perfumed bubble bath, soap or talcum powder around your genitals – use plain, unperfumed ones instead
do not use a diaphragm or condoms with spermicidal lubricant on them – try another type of contraception
Speak to your GP if these measures don’t work.
Drinking cranberry juice or using probiotics aren’t proven to reduce your chances of getting a UTI.
Source:
NHS 24