Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/kidneys-bladder-and-prostate/urinary-tract-infection-uti-in-children/

---

Urinary tract infection (UTI) in children
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common infections. They can affect the urinary tract, including the:
bladder
urethra (the tube where urine leaves the body)
kidneys
UTIs aren’t usually serious and can be treated with antibiotics if needed.
Speak to your GP if your child has symptoms of a UTI like:
vomiting
tiredness and lack of energy (lethargy)
irritability
not eating properly
not gaining weight
yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) in very young children
pain or a burning sensation when peeing
needing to pee frequently
deliberately holding in their pee
a change in their normal toilet habits, like wetting themselves or wetting the bed
unpleasant-smelling pee
cloudy pee
Phone 111 or speak to a GP urgently if:
You think a child has a urinary tract infection (UTI) and they:
are under 3
have a very high temperature, or feel hot and shivery
have a very low temperature below 36C
are confused or drowsy
have pain in the lower tummy or in the back, just under the ribs
have blood in their pee
Types of UTI
A UTI may be either:
upper
lower
An upper UTI means an infection of the
kidneys
or ureters. Ureters are the tubes connecting the kidneys to the bladder.
A lower UTI means an infection of the bladder (cystitis) or urethra. This is the tube that carries urine out of the body.
Causes of UTIs in children
UTIs occur when the urinary tract becomes infected, usually by bacteria.
Bacteria from the gut can enter the urinary tract through the tube that carries pee out of the body (urethra). This may happen when a child:
wipes their bottom
soils their nappy
Some children may be more likely to get UTIs due to problems emptying their bladder. This can be due to:
constipation
dysfunctional elimination syndrome – a child ‘holds on’ to their pee, even though they have the urge to pee
vesicoureteral reflux – urine leaks back up from the bladder into the ureters and kidney
Treating UTIs in children
UTIs in children will often improve within 24 to 48 hours of treatment. A UTI won’t usually cause any long term problems.
Antibiotics
UTIs can usually be treated at home with antibiotics as long as the child is:
over 3 months
not at risk of serious illness
The most suitable antibiotic depends on what type of UTI the child has.
Sometimes children can experience side effects whilst taking antibiotics. This can include feeling sick or having an upset stomach. These symptoms are usually mild and should stop once the antibiotics have finished.
It’s very important to finish the prescribed course of antibiotics. This’ll prevent the infection from coming back.
Other treatments
If necessary, children can also take liquid
paracetamol
to help ease the symptoms of a UTI.
As a precaution, some children with a UTI may have to be treated in hospital. Your GP may advise you if this is necessary.
Don’t use non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen to treat a UTI. These can harm the kidneys.
Aspirin should never be given to children under the age of 16.
Preventing UTIs in children
It isn’t possible to prevent all childhood UTIs. But, there are some things you can do to reduce the risk of your child getting one.
Do
encourage girls to wipe their bottom from front to back
make sure children are well hydrated and go to the toilet regularly
avoid nylon and other synthetic underwear – pick loose, cotton underwear
avoid scented soaps or bubble baths – these can increase the risk of developing a UTI
Recurrent UTIs in children
A small number of children have recurring UTIs. If your child has had a UTI before, it’s important to watch out for any symptoms.
If any symptoms do come back, tell your GP as soon as possible.
Source:
NHS 24