Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/a-to-z/varicose-veins/

---

Varicose veins
Varicose veins are swollen and twisted veins that usually occur on the legs. They’re common and are not usually serious.
Symptoms of varicose veins
Varicose veins are widened veins that look swollen and twisted under the skin. They may be lumpy or bulge out.
It’s most common for varicose veins to develop in the legs but you can get them on other parts of the body too.
Source: https://dermnetnz.org/
Other symptoms of varicose veins can include:
pain, aching or a feeling of heaviness
swollen feet and ankles
burning or throbbing in your legs
muscle cramp in your legs, particularly at night
dry, itchy and thin skin over the affected vein
These symptoms are usually worse during warm weather or if you’ve been standing up for long periods of time. They may improve if you rest and raise your legs.
Contact your GP practice immediately if:
your skin is painful, hot and swollen
If your GP practice is closed, phone 111.
Speak to your GP practice if:
You have varicose veins and you:
have symptoms like pain, itching or swelling in your legs
get a sore on your leg that has not healed after 2 weeks
Treatment for varicose veins
Most varicose veins don’t need to be treated.
A GP may refer you to a specialist for tests and treatment if you have:
symptoms like pain, heaviness, swollen legs, itching or skin changes
any complications, like ulcers on your legs
Treatment to improve how varicose veins look isn’t usually available on the NHS if they don’t cause any other problems. You may be able to pay for it privately.
Specialist treatment for varicose veins
If you’re referred to a specialist they’ll usually do a test called a duplex ultrasound. This is a type of scan to check your blood flow. This helps to confirm if you have varicose veins and helps to plan your treatment.
There are different types of treatment that may be offered, including:
procedures to block blood flow in the veins – like endothermal ablation and foam sclerotherapy
surgery to remove varicose veins
compression stockings
The specialist will explain which treatment may be best for you. They’ll also explain the benefits and risks.
Endothermal ablation
Endothermal ablation is usually the first choice of treatment for varicose veins. It blocks blood flow in the veins so that they become less swollen.
There are 2 types of endothermal ablation.
Radiofrequency ablation
Radiofrequency ablation involves heating the wall of your varicose vein using radiofrequency energy.
During the procedure:
The vein is accessed through a small cut made above or below the knee.
A narrow tube called a catheter is guided into the vein using an
ultrasound scan
.
A device called a probe is inserted into the catheter. It sends out radiofrequency energy which heats the vein until it’s walls collapse. This seals the vein meaning blood will naturally be redirected to one of your healthy veins.
Endovenous laser treatment
Endovenous laser treatment involves heating the wall of your varicose vein using energy from radio waves.
During the procedure:
The vein is accessed through a small cut made above or below the knee.
A narrow tube called a catheter is guided into the vein using an
ultrasound scan
.
A tiny laser is passed through the catheter and positioned at the top of your varicose vein.
The laser delivers short bursts of energy that heat up the vein and seal it closed. The laser is slowly pulled along the vein using the ultrasound scan to guide it. This allows the whole vein to be closed.
You’ll usually be awake during these procedures. You’ll have a
local anaesthetic
so that you don’t feel any pain.
You may need to wear compression stockings for about a week. You may have some pain and bruising, but you should be able to go back to most of your usual activities straight away.
Foam sclerotherapy
You’ll usually be offered foam sclerotherapy if endothermal ablation is not suitable for you.
You’ll be awake during the procedure. You’ll have a
local anaesthetic
so that you don’t feel any pain.
During the procedure:
You’ll have injections into your vein of a chemical mixed with air (foam).
An
ultrasound scan
is used to make sure the injections are in the right place.
The chemical blocks the vein so that blood stops flowing through it.
You’ll have the procedure in a hospital or clinic. You’ll be able to go home the same day.
You may need to wear compression stockings for about a week. You may have some pain and bruising, but you should be able to go back to most of your usual activities straight away.
Surgery to remove varicose veins (ligation and stripping)
You may be offered surgery to remove varicose veins if other procedures are not suitable for you. Surgery to remove varicose veins is called ligation and stripping.
You’ll usually be asleep during the operation. You’ll have a
general anaesthetic
so you won’t feel any pain.
During the procedure:
The surgeon will mark your legs to show where the vein needs to be removed.
The surgeon will make 1 cut in your upper leg (groin) and another cut lower down your leg at your knee or ankle.
The surgeon will find the vein through the first cut and will tie it to stop blood flowing.
A thin, flexible wire is then passed down the vein to the second cut. The surgeon will use the wire to pull the vein out.
The cuts are closed using stitches that dissolve so they don’t need to be removed.
You can usually go home the same day. Moving around may be uncomfortable for a few days, and you may have some pain and bruising for a few weeks. You may need to take 1 to 2 weeks off work.
Your leg will be tightly bandaged or you’ll need to wear compression stockings for about a week.
Compression stockings
Compression stockings put pressure on your lower legs. This improves blood flow and can help pain and swelling.
You’ll only be offered compression stockings for varicose veins if:
procedures or surgery are not suitable for you, or
you do not need other treatments
If you’re pregnant and have varicose veins, you may be offered compression stockings.
Compression stockings are not suitable if you have problems with blood flow in your arteries. A specialist can check for this.
Wearing compression stockings
There are different types of compression stockings. It’s important to talk to a doctor or pharmacist to make sure you get the right type for you.
You’ll usually need to wear compression stockings during the day and take them off at night.
If the stockings make your skin dry, apply a moisturising cream before going to bed.
Compression stockings usually have to be replaced every 3 to 6 months. If your stockings get damaged, speak to your GP practice.
What causes varicose veins?
Varicose veins happen when the valves that control the flow of blood in your vein don’t work properly. This causes blood to build up and put pressure on the vein, which makes it swell and twist.
Who’s most at risk of varicose veins?
Anyone can get varicose veins but they’re more likely if you:
are a woman
are older
are overweight
are pregnant
spend a lot of time sitting or standing
have other family members with varicose veins
have had
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Complications of varicose veins
Most people with varicose veins won’t develop any complications. If you do, it’ll usually be many years after your varicose veins first appeared.
Some complications of varicose veins include:
bleeding
varicose eczema
– itchy, flaky and dry skin over your varicose veins
superficial vein thrombosis – blood clots that cause hard, painful veins
deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
– blood clots deeper inside your leg
venous leg ulcers
– sore that take a long time to heal
Living with varicose veins
If you have varicose veins, there are things you can do to help your symptoms.
Do
keep active regularly to improve blood flow
put your legs up when resting – for example with a stool or cushion
use a moisturising cream if you have dry, flaky or itchy skin
try to keep a healthy weight
Don’t
do not stand for long periods
do not sit for long periods unless you have your legs raised
do not smoke as it can damage your veins
Source:
NHS 24