Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/ears-nose-and-throat/vertigo/

---

Vertigo
Vertigo is a symptom, rather than a condition itself. It’s the feeling that you, or the environment around you, is moving or spinning.
This feeling may be barely noticeable, or it may be so severe that you find it difficult to keep your balance and do everyday tasks.
Vertigo can develop suddenly and last for a few seconds or much longer. If you have severe vertigo, your symptoms may be constant and last for several days, making daily life very difficult.
Symptoms of vertigo may include:
loss of balance – which can make it difficult to stand or walk
feeling sick or being sick
dizziness
When to get medical advice
Speak to your GP practice if:
your vertigo comes on suddenly
you have vertigo that will not go away
you have vertigo that keeps coming back
vertigo is affecting your daily life
Phone 111 or phone your GP for an urgent appointment if:
You have vertigo and:
a severe headache
feel sick or are being sick
have a high temperature and feel shivery
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
You have vertigo and:
double vision
hearing loss
difficulty speaking or slurred speech
weakness, numbness or tingling in your arms or legs
Diagnosing vertigo
Your GP will ask about your symptoms and can carry out an examination to help determine some types of vertigo. They may also refer you for further tests.
What causes vertigo?
Inner ear problems, which affect balance, are the most common causes of vertigo. It can also be caused by problems in certain parts of the brain.
Common causes of vertigo may include:
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) – where certain head movements trigger vertigo
migraine
labyrinthitis
or vestibular neuronitis – an inner ear infection
persistent postural-perceptual dizziness (PPPD)
Ménière’s disease
Less commonly, vertigo can sometimes be caused by conditions that affect certain parts of the brain. This can include:
a stroke
multiple sclerosis
brain tumours
Depending on the condition causing vertigo, you may have other symptoms, such as:
a high temperature
ringing in your ears (
tinnitus
)
hearing loss
Treatment for vertigo
Treatment will depend on the cause. Gentle movement is encouraged as soon as you are able to. This will help the balance systems in your body reset.
Medicines (such as prochlorperazine and some antihistamines) may help in most cases of vertigo. These should only be used for a short amount of time (3-5 days). Long term use may slow the recovery process.
Many people with vertigo get better without treatment. If you’re still experiencing vertigo or balance problems after 6 weeks, you may be referred to a Vestibular (balance) Physiotherapist or an ENT (Ear, nose & throat) consultant.
Things you can do to help your symptoms
There may be things you can do yourself to help your symptoms, and reduce how often you have vertigo.
Do
lie still in a quiet, dark room to reduce the spinning feeling
move your head as able
sit down straight away when you feel dizzy
turn on the lights if you get up at night
use a walking stick if you’re at risk of falling
use an extra pillow the first couple of nights if you’re unable to sleep lying flat
get up slowly when getting out of bed and sit on the edge of the bed for a minute or so before standing
try to relax and avoid stress – anxiety can make vertigo worse
listen to your body, if able you should continue with some of your normal activities
try to return to moving naturally, as this will help you recover
Don’t
do not avoid moving, as movement helps your system recover
Where possible, you should try not avoid certain positions. Although it may feel easier in the short term, doing this won’t help your vertigo. It can cause more harm if you avoid all movement and never get the correct diagnosis.
Safety
If you have vertigo, there are some safety issues to consider. For example:
you should tell your employer if your job involves operating machinery or climbing ladders
you may have a higher chance of falling – read about
preventing falls
for advice on reducing your risk
Driving and vertigo
If you drive, you must tell the DVLA about your vertigo.
Further information on driving with vertigo on GOV.UK
Fear of heights
The term vertigo is often incorrectly used to describe a fear of heights. The medical term for a fear of heights and the dizzy feeling associated with looking down from a high place is ‘acrophobia’.
Further information and advice about phobias
Source:
ENT Scotland