Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/stomach-liver-and-gastrointestinal-tract/vomiting-in-adults/

---

Vomiting in adults
Return to Symptoms
Enter age
Last Updated:
Next Review Date:
Review my answers
Find your local services
Search for a service near you by entering your postcode below.
Please input your postcode in the following format: A12 1BC
GP Practices
Dental Services
Pharmacies
Opticians
Postcode
Search
NHS inform has more information on this condition.
Read more
Previous
Start guide
Review my answers
×
You told us your credentials were:
:
You said:
Based on the information you gave us, we made the following recommendation:
Close
Keep a copy
View PDF
Nausea and vomiting in adults isn’t usually a sign of anything serious. It tends to only last 1 or 2 days.
Vomiting is the body’s way of getting rid of harmful substances from the stomach, or it may be a reaction to something that has irritated the gut.
One of the most common causes of vomiting in adults is
gastroenteritis
. This is an infection of the gut usually caused by bacteria or a virus. It’ll normally improve within a few days.
Vomiting can occasionally be a sign of something more serious, such as
appendicitis
.
There is a separate page on
vomiting in children and babies
.
Vomiting self-help guide
Advice for people aged 5 years or more experiencing vomiting.
Complete our self-help guide to check your symptoms and find out what to do next.
Phone 999 or go to A&E if:
You’re vomiting and you also have:
sudden, severe abdominal (tummy) pain
severe chest pain
blood in your vomit or what looks like coffee granules
have green or yellow-green vomit
a stiff neck and high temperature (fever)
a sudden, severe
headache
that’s unlike any headache you’ve had before
swallowed something poisonous, or think you may have
have a stiff neck and pain when looking at bright lights
Speak to your GP if:
you’ve been vomiting repeatedly for more than a day or two
you’re unable to keep down any fluids because you’re vomiting repeatedly
you have
signs of severe dehydration
, such as confusion, a rapid heartbeat, sunken eyes and passing little or no urine
you’ve lost a lot of weight since you became ill
you experience episodes of vomiting frequently
you’re worried about your vomiting and are feeling very unwell
you have
diabetes
and have been vomiting a lot, particularly if you take insulin as it can affect your blood sugar level
Common causes of vomiting in adults
Gastroenteritis
If you have
diarrhoea
as well as vomiting, it’s likely you have gastroenteritis. This is one of the most common causes of vomiting in adults.
It’s often caused by:
a virus, like
norovirus
food poisoning
caused by bacteria in contaminated food
Your immune system will usually fight off the infection after a few days.
Pregnancy
Pregnant women often experience nausea and vomiting, particularly during the early stages of pregnancy. This is often called morning sickness but it can happen at any time of the day.
Migraines
If you have recurrent episodes of vomiting along with intense, throbbing headaches that last for a few hours to days at a time, you may be experiencing
migraines
.
Pain relief, such as
paracetamol
and
ibuprofen
, can sometimes help control the pain. Your GP can prescribe anti-sickness medicine to help prevent vomiting.
Labyrinthitis
If you also feel dizzy, or feel like you’re spinning (
vertigo
), you may have an inner ear infection called
labyrinthitis
.
Labyrinthitis will usually improve over a few days. Your GP can prescribe medication to reduce your symptoms if needed.
Motion sickness
Nausea and vomiting when travelling could be a sign of motion sickness.
You can try:
looking at the horizon
distracting yourself by listening to music
Appendicitis
As well as vomiting,
appendicitis
can cause severe pain in your abdomen (tummy). You should phone 999 for an ambulance if you experience pain that suddenly becomes worse and spreads across your abdomen. These are signs that you appendix may have burst.
If you have appendicitis, you will often need surgery to remove your appendix.
Other causes of vomiting in adults
Vomiting in adults can also be caused by a number of other things, including:
certain medicines, such as
antibiotics
and opioid painkillers
drinking too much alcohol
kidney infections
and
kidney stones
a blockage in your bowel, which may be caused by a hernia or
gallstones
chemotherapy
or
radiotherapy
acute cholecystitis (inflammation of the gallbladder)
Looking after yourself at home
Mostly, you can take care of yourself at home until you feel better.
Do
keep taking small sips of water frequently so you don’t become dehydrated
drink a sweet drink such as fruit juice to replace lost sugar, unless it make you feel sick
eat salty snacks, such as crisps, which can help replace lost salt
try ginger (in supplements, biscuits or tea) – but check with your pharmacist or GP before using ginger supplements
Source:
NHS 24