Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/warts-and-verrucas/

---

Warts and verrucas
Warts are small lumps that often develop on the skin of the hands and feet. They vary in appearance and may develop singly or in clusters.
Most people will have warts at some point in their life. They tend to affect children and teenagers more than adults.
Warts are caused by certain strains of the human papilloma virus (HPV)
More images of warts
Warts can develop on the hands and feet
Source:
dermnetnz.org
Wart on finger
Source:
dermnetnz.org
What causes warts and verrucas?
Warts are caused by certain strains of the human papilloma virus (HPV).
There are lots of different strains of HPV and these cause different types of warts.
HPV causes too much keratin (a hard protein) to develop in the top skin layer (epidermis). The extra keratin produces the rough, hard texture of a wart.
How warts spread
HPV is passed on through close skin-to-skin contact. It can also be passed on indirectly by contact with contaminated objects like:
towels
shoes
areas surrounding swimming pools
the floors of communal changing areas
You’re more likely to get infected if your skin is wet or damaged.
Warts can also be spread to other parts of your own body. You can spread the virus if you:
scratch, knock or bite a wart
bite your nails or suck your fingers (if they have warts on them)
shave your face or legs
After you become infected, it can take weeks or even months for a wart or verruca to appear.
When to get help
Warts and verrucas aren’t usually serious and can be treated by a pharmacist.
Your pharmacist will give you advice about the best treatment for you.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Speak to a GP if you have a:
growth on your skin that you’re worried about
wart or verruca that keeps coming back
wart or verruca that’s very large or painful
wart that bleeds
wart that changes in how it looks
wart on your face or genitals
Types of wart
There are several different types of warts. These vary in size and shape.
Common warts (verruca vulgaris)
Source:
dermnetnz.org
If you have a common wart, it will:
be round or oval-shaped
be firm and raised
have a rough, irregular surface
often develop on the knuckles, fingers and knees
vary in size, from less than 1mm to more than 10mm (1cm) in diameter
You may develop one common wart or several.
Filiform warts (verruca filiformis)
Source:
dermnetnz.org
Filiform warts are long and slender in appearance. They often develop on the neck or face.
Mosaic warts
Mosaic warts grow in clusters and form a ’tile-like’ pattern. They often develop on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.
Periungual warts
Source:
dermnetnz.org
Periungual warts develop under and around the fingernails or toenails. They:
have a rough surface
can affect the shape of the nail
can be painful
Plane warts
Source:
dermnetnz.org
It’s possible to have between one and several hundred plane warts, which can develop in clusters. They are usually:
a yellowish colour
smooth, round and flat-topped
2 to 4mm in diameter
common in young children – mainly affecting the hands, face and legs
Plane warts can sometimes develop on the lower legs of women. This is because the human papilloma virus (HPV) can be spread through shaving.
Verrucas (plantar warts)
Verrucas usually develop on the soles of the feet. The affected area of skin will be:
white, often with a black dot (blood vessel) in the centre
flat rather than raised
Verrucas can sometimes be painful if they’re on a weight-bearing part of the foot.
Treatment for warts and verrucas
Warts usually clear up without treatment.
The length of time it takes for a wart to disappear will vary from person to person. It can take up to 2 years for the virus to leave your system and for warts to disappear. Warts tend to last longer in older children and adults.
Leaving the wart to go away by itself is one option. But, you may want to consider treatment if your wart is:
painful
in an awkward position
causing you distress or embarrassment
A wart will sometimes return following treatment.
Types of treatment
Common ways to treat warts and verrucas include:
salicylic acid – available from pharmacies in creams, gels, paints and medicated plasters
cryotherapy – liquid nitrogen is applied to the wart to freeze and destroy affected skin cells
chemical treatments – chemicals are applied to warts to kill affected skin cells
Surgery is not usually recommended for warts.
How to prevent warts and verrucas
There are steps you can take to lower your chances of getting warts, and prevent them spreading to others.
Do
keep your feet dry
change your socks every day
take care when shaving – the virus can be spread easily if you cut yourself
wear gloves when using shared gym equipment if you have a wart on your hand
wear pool slippers or flip flops in communal changing rooms and showers
cover the wart or verruca with a waterproof plaster or a verruca sock when swimming or while doing PE at school
Don’t
do not touch other people’s warts
do not share towels, flannels or other personal items with someone who has a wart
do not share shoes or socks with someone who has a verruca
do not scratch or pick a wart or verruca – it’ll encourage the HPV to spread to other parts of your body
Source:
NHS 24