Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/neck-and-back-problems-and-conditions/whiplash/

---

Whiplash
This information may be useful for those who have been diagnosed with whiplash, this can also known as Whiplash Associated Disorder (WAD). People who are experiencing new or ongoing symptoms should contact their healthcare professional.
Read more about managing a neck problem
What is whiplash?
Whiplash happens when your head is suddenly jolted backwards and forwards in a whip like movement. This can irritate some of the muscles and ligaments in your neck. There is often a delay of 24-48 hours before you feel any pain or stiffness from whiplash. These symptoms normally settle on their own in 2-3 months.
Common causes of whiplash include:
being involved in a car accident
a fall
a sporting injury
Speak to your GP urgently if:
You have experienced a new onset or significant worsening of the following symptoms:
changes to bladder and bowel function e.g. urgency, frequency, difficulty passing urine, leaking, incontinence
changes to sensation around the bottom and/or genitals or sexual dysfunction e.g. recent inability to achieve orgasm or erection
reduced balance or difficulty walking
pain, weakness, heaviness or changing sensation in the arms or legs
clumsy hands e.g. dropping things, struggling with handwriting, buttons or zips
if your neck pain is associated with a severe headache
Phone 111 if your GP practice is closed.
Contact your GP if you have whiplash and:
you also feel generally unwell
you are have other health conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis or cancer
Symptoms of whiplash
Common symptoms of whiplash include:
neck pain that may spread to the head, arm and upper back
neck stiffness and difficulty moving your head
You may also experience short term:
headaches
tinnitus
dizziness or blurred vision
muscle spasms
nausea, sleep disturbance
pain in the jaw
pain when swallowing
memory loss
difficulty concentrating
Diagnosing whiplash
In order for whiplash to be diagnosed you may need an assessment from a healthcare professional.
They’ll ask you questions and carry out a physical examination. This may include checking your range of movement and strength.
Occasionally you may need to have a further examination to rule out other possible health conditions.
Treatment of whiplash
In most cases whiplash will resolve gradually over time with the right help and advice. This can take a number of months.
Things you can do to help yourself includes:
gently moving your neck and shoulders, immediately after your injury
avoiding prolonged static postures
try to continue doing everyday activities – it might hurt a little but it will speed up your recovery
early return to your normal hobbies are encouraged
Using a neck collar or brace is not recommended as it does not help. It can often make symptoms worse.
Other treatments that can help
pain medication – this can help you move more comfortably, which can help your recovery
heat or ice packs
physiotherapy
psychological support
More about taking painkillers
More about heat or ice
You should never place ice or heat directly on your skin. Use a barrier, like a towel, to protect your skin from a burn.
How long you use ice as a treatment can depend on the painful area but generally up to 15 minutes. You should leave a few hours between treatments.
You should stop treating the area with ice or heat and seek advice from a medical professional if you notice an increase in redness, discolouration or blistering of the skin.
If you have any issues with circulation or sensation, you shouldn’t use ice or heat as a treatment for neck pain.
If the cause of your injury has also caused emotional trauma, you may want to
read more about mental wellbeing
as this can impact your recovery.
Work
You don’t need to be symptom free before you consider returning to work. Continuing to go to work, or returning to work as soon as is possible for you, will help your recovery.
Gradually getting back to your normal daily activities can help to build up your strength and stamina levels.
Help and support
Following this advice, you should see gradual improvements over time.
You should see the biggest change in your symptoms within the first couple of weeks. Most problems should have started to improve within 6 weeks.
If there has been no improvement in your whiplash within 6 weeks of following this advice, or if your symptoms get worse at any time, talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Find out how to
access MSK services in your area
.
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group