Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/cardiovascular-disease/heart-disease/wolff-parkinson-white-syndrome/

---

Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is a heart condition that affects the heart’s rhythm. It does not always cause symptoms but in some cases it can cause the heart to suddenly beat abnormally fast. Episodes can last from seconds to hours. In rare cases, episodes may continue for days.
Symptoms of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Symptoms of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome can include:
palpitations
(a pounding or fluttering feeling in your chest or neck)
feeling light-headed, dizzy or faint
fainting
shortness of breath
feeling anxious
sweating
chest pain
or discomfort
How often episodes happen can vary from person to person. Some people might have episodes on a daily basis. Others may only experience them occasionally or have no symptoms at all.
Diagnosing Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
If you have symptoms like palpitations, you may have a test called an
electrocardiogram (ECG)
. This measures your heart’s rhythm and electrical activity.
Some people need to wear a small portable ECG to capture an episode with Wolff-Parkinson-White symptoms. A portable ECG measures your heart rate continuously for 24 hours, or you can switch it on at the start of an episode.
If your GP finds that you have Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, they’ll assess your symptoms. They may then refer you to a heart specialist (a cardiologist).
You may have an exercise treadmill test as well as an ECG to assess you further.
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome can also be diagnosed if you need to have an ECG for another reason. For example, as part of routine assessments before surgery. This means it may be diagnosed even if you don’t have any symptoms.
Treatment for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
If you have symptoms of a rapid heart beat, this will sometimes settle down on its own without treatment. In some cases, medication or a treatment called
catheter ablation
is needed.
In an emergency, the heart’s electrical activity sometimes needs to be reset. This is called electrical
cardioversion
.
What causes Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
When the heart beats normally, the muscular walls contract (tighten and squeeze) to force blood out and around the body. The muscles then relax, allowing the heart to fill with blood again.
People with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome have an extra piece of heart tissue. This causes a ‘short circuit’ where the heart’s electrical signals quickly travel around in a loop. This can result in a very fast heart beat.
Living with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is not usually serious, even if treatment is needed. For many people, episodes will be rare or they may have no symptoms at all.
If you or someone you know has been diagnosed with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, support is available.
The
British Heart Foundation’s
H
eart Helpline
can help with any questions or worries you have about heart or circulatory issues. Phone the helpline on 0808 802 1234(Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm) for advice.
Information and support for people living with a heart condition is also available through:
The British Heart Foundation
Chest, Heart & Stroke Scotland
Get more information and advice on cardiovascular conditions
Source:
Scottish Government