Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/arm-shoulder-and-hand-problems-and-conditions/wrist-fracture/

---

Wrist fracture
This information is for anyone who has a wrist fracture that doesn’t need surgery.
Your injury may be referred to as a fracture, break or crack. These terms all mean the same thing.
When you have a fracture, it’s not just the bone that’s affected. You’ll also have injured some of the soft tissues around it. Soft tissues include the:
muscles
ligaments
tendons
nerves
A wrist fracture.
Recovery times
After a wrist fracture, most of the healing happens between 6 to 12 weeks.
It’s normal to have aches and discomfort beyond this. This often happens when you try activities you haven’t done for a while.
It’s also normal for the area to be more sensitive for several months after the injury.
What can affect your recovery?
There are some things that might affect your recovery.
Smoking
Smoking affects all your tissues and slows facture healing times. In some people, it can stop healing altogether.
Stopping smoking as your fracture heals will help to ensure the best recovery.
Get help to stop smoking.
General Health
Some medical conditions, like
diabetes
, may slow down the healing process.
Eating a
healthy diet
and
keeping yourself active
will help your recovery.
Medication
Some medications can slow down fracture healing. If you have concerns about your medication talk to a healthcare professional.
Anti-inflammatory medication, like Ibuprofen or Naproxen, has been shown to delay healing.
What to expect after a wrist fracture
A wrist fracture can be debilitating as you can’t use your hand normally.
Depending on the type of fracture you have, a cast may be put on the area or your may be given a splint. This helps to prevent movement of the area as it heals.
If you’ve been given a splint, you can remove it for hygiene purposes. For example, to allow you to shower or bathe.
If the splint is no longer fitting well please contact your fracture clinic.
Further information on having a cast fitted or removed.
Rehabilitation plan
There are things you can do to help your recovery after a wrist fracture.
0 to 4 weeks after your injury
Just after your injury, you should:
maintain your shoulder and elbow movements
keep your fingers and thumb moving by regularly opening and closing your hand to make a fist
manage your pain and swelling
4 to 6 weeks after your injury
At this time, you’ll come out of your splint or cast. It’s not unusual to be stiff when your cast or splint is removed.
You can start gentle exercises, as guided by your healthcare professional.
6 to 8 weeks after your injury
As your injury recovers, you can begin to:
return to full function
resume normal day to day activity
gradually increase the amount of weight you’re carrying
return to contact sports at 12 weeks
Try exercises to support your recovery
You can start exercises for your wrist once advised by your healthcare professional.
Stop exercising if it makes your symptoms worse, or if it causes new pain.
Help and support
If your wrist function hasn’t improved within 6 weeks of following this advice, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Pain after a fracture
It’s normal to have some discomfort in the areas around your fracture. The areas affected can be:
other soft tissues
nearby joints
Pain can change from day to day and it doesn’t always depend on what you’re doing. It’s common to have pain at rest.
It’s normal to have some pain even when your fracture has healed. Some people also experience discomfort in the fracture site during colder weather.
Your local pharmacy can give you advice on managing pain after a fracture.
Find your nearest pharmacy
Swelling after a fracture
It’s normal to have swelling near the fracture site. It often spreads down your arm.
Swelling can sometimes last for months. The amount of swelling can also change depending on:
your position
your activity
the time of day
It’s important that swelling is managed well to help your recovery.
How to manage swelling after a fracture
Having a lot of swelling can become uncomfortable or limit your movement. To help reduce the swelling you can try to:
raise your arm above your heart when resting – you can do this by supporting it with pillows
keep the other joints in your arm moving normally
find a balance between rest and activity
use self-massage to reduce swelling – if you’re able to, direct the massage from your fingertips towards  your elbow
Bruising after a fracture
It’s normal to have bruising after a fracture.
Bruising can be widespread and may appear a long way from your fracture. It can be very purple to start with and may change colour as you recover.
Getting back to normal activities
In general, you should pace yourself when it comes to getting back to normal activities. Only do things as you feel able.
Driving
You should contact your insurance provider before driving as your injury may affect your insurance.
Once you’re out of your splint, the general advice is that you must be able to safely perform an emergency stop or manoeuvre.
You should always be in full control of your vehicle.
Work
Your return to work will depend on the type of work you do and your employer. It may be possible to discuss a phased return to work or changed duties.
You don’t need to see a healthcare professional to return to work.
Daily activities
Keep doing any activities you’re able to, as your pain allows. Over time, gradually increase what you do.
Reduced flexibility and strength may make things more difficult to start with. This will get better as you slowly build up to all your usual activities.
Mood
Frustration or
low mood
after an injury is normal. As you get back to normal life this should get better.
Falls
It can be common for a wrist fracture to happen if you fall. It’s important to know why you had a fall. It’s also important to learn how to improve your strength and balance to help prevent falls in the future.
Get advice about preventing falls
Bone health
Osteoporosis
is a condition that causes the bones to become weaker and can put you more at risk of fracture.
Fractures related to osteoporosis are often called fragility fractures and are caused by a minor trauma. For example, a small fall or bump that wouldn’t normally lead to a fracture.
Healthcare professionals may check if you’re fracture is caused by osteoporosis. This is normal if you:
are over the age of 50
have any risk factors for fracture
If you’re worried that you may be at risk of fragility fractures, speak to your GP practice. They’ll be able to offer you further advice.
Find out more about diagnosing osteoporosis and risk factors for it
Source:
NHS 24 MSK Clinical Advisory Group