Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/arm-shoulder-and-hand-problems-and-conditions/wrist-hand-and-finger-problems/

---

Wrist, hand and finger problems
This information may be useful for those who have a new wrist, hand or finger problem. People who have been diagnosed with a wrist, hand or finger condition or have had recent surgery in the area should follow the advice of their healthcare professional.
Wrist, hand and finger problems can cause a range of symptoms including:
pain
swelling and stiffness
pins and needles or numbness
In many cases, new pain or a flare-up of long-standing wrist, hand and finger problems should begin to settle within 6 weeks without the need to see a healthcare professional.
Phone 111 if:
there’s been a new, significant trauma within the last 7 days, for example a fall from height or direct blow to the wrist, hand or finger
your wrist or fingers are misshapen following a new injury
you have a significant open wound
you can’t move your wrist, hand or fingers at all
if your hand is icy cold and pale, or blue
Contact your GP, or phone 111 if your GP practice is closed, if:
you are experiencing any altered sensation like pins and needles or numbness in the hand or fingers
pain and stiffness in the small joints
What causes wrist, hand and finger problems?
Problems with the wrist, hand, and fingers are common and can be caused by simple things like carrying out repetitive tasks or an injury during sport or a fall.
As you get older, normal age-related changes can cause your wrist, hand or finger problem to flare-up now and again, often for no reason.
Can wrist, hand and finger pain cause problems elsewhere?
You may feel pain and stiffness in your forearm. This should improve as your problem gets better.
Sometimes you can experience altered sensation like pins and needles or numbness in your hand or fingers when the nerve is the irritated. If you have these symptoms speak to your GP.
Occasionally, problems felt in your wrist, hand or fingers can be due to a neck problem. This can happen even when you don’t feel pain in your neck. People with this sort of problem often describe the pain as pins and needles, sharp, hot or burning pain.
If you have any of these symptoms it would be helpful to
read about neck problems.
Self-help
There are a number of things you can do to help your wrist, hand or finger problem.
Keeping your wrist, hand and fingers moving is an essential part of your treatment and recovery.
This video requires YouTube cookies.
Update your consent
.
How to get moving
Within the first 24 to 48 hours after your wrist, hand or finger problem has started you should try to:
reduce your activities but move as much as your symptoms allow
put your hand in a supported position if it’s comfortable, when resting
move the area gently for 10 to 20 seconds every hour when you’re awake
After 48 hours:
try to use your hand more – exercise really helps and can relieve pain
do whatever you normally would and stay at, or return to work – this is important and is the best way to get better
It’s beneficial to do specific exercises that can help in your recovery. They may be challenging at the beginning so just do what you can and try to build it up over time.
Exercises to help with wrist, hand and finger problems
Benefits of keeping active
Keeping active’s the single best thing you can do for your general health.
Being physically active can:
maintain your current levels of fitness – even if you have to modify what you normally do, any activity is better than none
keep your other muscles and joints strong and flexible
prevent a recurrence of the problem
help you aim for a healthy body weight
Avoid sports or heavy lifting until you have less discomfort and good movement. Remember to warm up fully before you start sporting activities.
Pain treatments
The following can help to reduce the pain:
pain medication – this can help you move more comfortably, which can help your recovery
heat or ice packs
More about taking painkillers.
Treating with ice or heat
Heat or ice can be beneficial in the management of musculoskeletal pain.
Ice is most beneficial if your wrist, finger or hand problem is related to an injury. You can try heat to help your pain levels if there’s no swelling and your symptoms are not related to a recent injury.
Never place ice or heat directly on your skin. Use a barrier, like a towel, to protect your skin from a burn.
How long you use ice as a treatment can vary. However, you should generally apply heat or ice for up to 15 minutes. You should also leave a few hours between treatments.
You should stop treating the area with ice or heat and seek advice from a medical professional if you notice an increase in redness, discolouration or blistering of the skin.
Watch a video on contrast bathing
, which reduces swelling by moving your affected hand between warm and cold water.
If you have any issues with circulation or sensation, you shouldn’t use ice or heat as a treatment for wrist, hand or finger pain.
Work
It’s recommended you stay at or return to work as quickly as possible during your recovery. You don’t need to be pain and symptom-free to return to work.
Help and support
Following this advice, you should see gradual improvements over time.
You should see the biggest change in your symptoms within the first couple of weeks. Most problems should have improved within 6 weeks.
If your wrist, or hand and finger problem hasn’t improved within 6 weeks of following this advice, it’s a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about your symptoms.
Find out how to access MSK services in your area.
Source:
MSK Expert Panel