Source URL: https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/infections-and-poisoning/zika-virus/

---

Zika virus
Zika virus disease is caused by the Zika virus. For most people, it causes a very mild infection and no long-term problems.
However, it may be harmful in pregnancy as it can lead to complications and birth defects in the baby. In particular, abnormally small heads (microcephaly).
Where is Zika virus found?
Zika virus does not naturally occur in the UK.
Zika virus has been reported in the following areas:
Africa
Asia
Australia and the Pacific region
Caribbean
Central America
South America
North America
Symptoms of Zika virus infection
Most people don’t have any symptoms when they are infected with Zika virus. If symptoms do occur, they are usually mild and start 3 to 14 days after the infection has been caught. Symptoms last around 2 to 7 days.
Commonly reported symptoms include:
rash
itching all over the body
fever
headache
joint pain (with possible swelling, mainly in the smaller joints of the hands and feet)
muscle pain
conjunctivitis (red eyes)
lower back pain
pain behind the eyes
How Zika virus infection is treated
There is no specific treatment for the symptoms of Zika virus.
Drinking plenty of water and taking paracetamol may help to relieve symptoms.
Speak to your GP or phone 111 if:
you feel unwell after returning from a country that has malaria as well as Zika virus
The symptoms of Zika virus and malaria can be similar so it is important to rule out malaria.
How you catch Zika virus infection
Zika virus is mainly spread by mosquito bites. Unlike the mosquitoes that spread malaria, this type of mosquito mainly bites during the day from sunrise to sunset.
If a woman is infected when she is pregnant, the virus can spread to the baby and may cause harm. This is called ‘Congential Zika Syndrome’.
Less commonly, Zika virus can be spread from:
a person with the infection to another during unprotected sex
through blood transfusions or organ transplants
Reducing Zika virus infection
If you are planning international travel you can use this
A to Z guide
to check if your destination has Zika virus.
There is no vaccine or medicine to prevent Zika virus infection.
In a country with a risk of Zika virus, you can reduce your risk of catching the virus by avoiding mosquito bites.
Pregnant women should avoid or postpone non-essential travel to areas with a risk of Zika virus transmission.
If you are going abroad, you can get information on the risk of Zika virus and detailed travel advice from
Travel Health Pro
.
Further information about
travel health and vaccinations
.
Preventing mosquito bites
Avoiding mosquito bites is one of the best ways to reduce your risk of Zika virus infection.
The most effective bite prevention methods should be used during daytime and night-time hours.
There are some steps you can take to avoid mosquito bites.
Do
cover your skin with light, long-sleeved clothing, and long trousers, dresses or skirts
apply insect repellent to any skin that is not covered by clothing, including your face and neck
remember to reapply insect repellent frequently and after sunscreen has been applied
rest or sleep under a mosquito net that’s been treated with an insecticide
use effective air conditioning indoors
make sure window/door screens are closed when you are indoors
The most effective repellents contain 50% diethyltoluamide (DEET). These can be used by pregnant or breastfeeding women.
Further information on
mosquito bite prevention
is available from Travel Health Pro.
Advice for pregnant women
Zika virus infection in pregnant women is a cause of birth defects in the baby, including microcephaly (abnormally small head). This can be associated with abnormal brain development. It is also known as congenital Zika syndrome.
Zika virus infection can also cause pregnancy complications, including stillbirth or premature delivery.
It is recommended that pregnant women avoid or postpone non-essential travel to areas with a risk of Zika virus until after pregnancy.
If you do plan to travel, discuss this with your midwife, obstetrician or a travel clinic.
If travel is unavoidable, there are actions you can take to help avoid infection.
Do
take extra care to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes
use condoms during vaginal, anal and oral sex while travelling and during your pregnancy
see your GP or midwife if you have recently returned from an area with Zika virus and tell them where you have been, even if you have not been unwell
Your midwife or hospital doctor will discuss the risk with you and advise whether you need any additional tests.
Advice for women trying to get pregnant
If you are trying to get pregnant, discuss your travel plans with your GP, practice nurse or travel clinic.
It is recommended that women avoid unprotected sex and starting a pregnancy while travelling in an area with Zika virus. You should also avoid unprotected sex and starting a pregnancy for 8 weeks (if a woman) or 3 months (if a man) after you return home.
What if I’m worried that my unborn baby has been affected by Zika?
Speak to your midwife or doctor for advice if you’re worried that your unborn baby may be affected by Zika virus. If you are still concerned after receiving assurances you can ask for counselling. Counselling can also be offered if you feel more stressed or anxious than usual.
Zika virus and blood donation
You should wait 28 days to donate blood after travelling to an area with Zika virus. These guidelines are set out by the
Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service
.
If you want to know whether any recent foreign travel temporarily prevents you from giving blood, visit the
Scotblood
website. You can also call their National Contact Centre on 0345 90 90 999.
Zika virus and Guillain-Barré syndrome
Zika virus is a cause of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), a serious condition of the nervous system.
The risk of developing GBS following a Zika virus infection is very low.
Information about you
If you have had Zika virus, your clinical team may give your details to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS).
This helps scientists look for better ways to prevent and treat this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time.
Find out more about the register.
Source:
NHS 24